APRIL having with his sweet showers moistened the drought of March, bathing every vein of the roots of trees & engendering flowers, Zephyrus with his pleasant breath provoking tender crops by virtue of young Phoebus, holding her course in Aries. Abstinence in Lent performing her accustomed race feeding on watery creatures, the Moon being entered into the aquatike sign of Pisces, and my blood increasing with the nurse of digestion, caused me to slumber, and no sooner did I discharge some part of that tribute due unto nature, when suddenly falling into most strange dreams, or rather visions, which seemed to dim my sight, I was partly amazed, and partly ravished with such admirations: which by apprehension have left such deep impressions in the treasury of my brains, as I am now compelled to commit some of them to the general recordor, whose body (after the amputation of his head) called for black drink to stain the overbeaten clouts, to ease my fatigable memory, the receptacle whereof is otherwise barred from all succeeding matters, like a trammell replenished with fish, which can contain no more than her full (as it were) natural imbibition.

Me thought according to the provoked motion, that being in a ship sailing on the seas with a prosperous wind and pleasant travel, I did arrive into a most fruitful Island, whose beautiful and pleasant sight, with savoury and delicious fruits distilling the juice of Nectar, ministrated such delight and health unto my wearied bones and drowsy mind, that by the delectable object of mine eyes, of fair running rivers with their silver streams, of green fields with their variety of flowers, of easy high ways set with fruit-trees on every side, of stately hills gracing their Horizon as the nose doth the face, of lively fountains of refreshing water, and by the sweet and harmonious melody of birds, whose warbling notes did penetrate my ears, all my senses were reduced to purity; my sight without colour, my hearing without sound, my smelling without smell, my tasting without smack or feeling, and my feeling without sense or tasting: all of them being simple in themselves, seemed to have obtained fruition of their wished desires, as if all things with a Sympathy of a general applause had been entertaining them, and prognosticating unto me all worldy felicity. traveling along with a settled pace, taking the benefit of these rare blessings, an insupportable loathsome smell scaled the fortress of my nose, depriving me of some part of the former pleasures. But the sense of smelling not having so great operation with the heart as the motion of the eyes, made the sense of seeing to remain predominant: howbeit by the interposition of the faculty of hearing. For behold a man of mean stature, stricken in age, yet bearing his body upright, did stand on the high way, in whose face did shine such amiable reverence as was pleasant to behold, notwithstanding his pale colour caused through the stinking smell; who told me with a loud voice these or the like speeches.

Not without cause (courteous gentleman) do you stop your nose to avoid this pestiferous smell, as dangerous to the smelling as the cockatrice is to the sight, proceeding from a terrible cruel Dragon, which devoureth and destroyeth daily the inhabitants of this (otherwise) flourishing Island, the king himself being in great jeopardy, with his sweet and well-beloved daughter: as heretofore his predecessor hath been, whom Saint George that valiant champion (through his great faith and valour) did rescue and save miraculously, delivering thereby the whole state of this common wealth from the like danger. The consideration whereof doth comfort and revive our dead hopes, that God will be pleased to stir up some other champion, who like unto the noble Roman Marcus Curtius shall deliver our weal public, and destroy this hideous monster, wherewith we have been troubled almost these 30. years ▪

Hearing the same, me thought I was possessed with a most fervent desire to understand the particularity as well of that Dragon whereof he complained, as of the other which is reported to have been slain or vanquished by Saint George: for I had many times inquired very diligently where that Island might be situated where that dragon was destroyed, and how it was possible that he could devour such an infinite number of creatures as is reported, which made me to be very importunate with this man to know every thing with the circumstances thereof, whom I found to be not only by learning, but also by nature of singular eloquence, and in reasoning and debating of matters of politic government, what by his natural wit, and what by daily exercise, surely he had in my judgement few fellows, by reason whereof, he gave me full satisfaction and answer to all my demands, and seemed in his discourse to discharge the part of an Orator.

This flourishing Island (quoth he) which overfloweth with milk and honey, is called Niobla, and lieth under the kingdom of Persia, the chief city whereof called Diospolus standeth partly upon the side of a low hill, in fashion almost four square. For the breadth of it beginneth a little beneath the top of the hill, and still continueth by the space of one mile. The length of it which lieth by the rivers side is somewhat more. The river called Semath riseth above four score miles above Diospolus out of a little spring: but being increased by other small rivers and brooks that run into it, before the city it is half a mile broad, and farther broader, and forty miles beyond the city it falleth into the Ocean sea. By all that space that lieth between the sea and the city, and certain miles also above the city, the water ebbeth and floweth six hours together with a swift tide, when the sea floweth in, for the length of thirty miles it filleth all the river Semath with salt water, and driveth back the fresh water of the river: and somewhat further, it changeth the sweetness of the fresh water with saltness. But a little beyond that the river waxeth sweet, and runneth forbye the city fresh and pleasant. There goeth a bridge over the river, made not of piles or of timber, but of stonework, with gorgeous and substantial Arches, at that part of the city that is farthest from sea: to the intent that ships may pass along forbye all the side of the city without let: from this river the water is derived and conveyed down in channels of lead diverse ways, even into the highest part of the city, which doth the inhabitants great service. The city is compassed about with high and thick stone walls, with some bulwarks, and a dry ditch somewhat broad and overgrown with bushes, briars and thorns. The streets are commodious and reasonable broad for the most part, with diverse gorgeous and fair buildings standing together without partition, diverse gardens are enclosed by the back part of the street, all in good order and most commodious. Almost in the middle part of this city in a most sumptuous and stately building, being four square, all of marble & free stone, erected upon several pillars curiously wrought, hath this Dragon his principal and most ordinary habitation, albeit he wandereth through the whole Island at his pleasure, and beareth a wonderful command in devouring & destroying an infinite number, altering the course of our government. For the the execution whereof, what with his venomous breath, what with his subtlety of setting men together by the ears, what with his natural devouring, or what with his alluring Serenian songs, he hath all the means that can be excogitated, even under the colour of religion and justice.

Wonder not (good sir) for this monstrous beast waxing every month bigger one than another, is like unto the Serpent that with the subtle guile of Satan seduced our great grandmother Eve, and brought all her posterity into exile, and misery upon mankind, and so doth this monster bring all misery and calamity unto our commonweal. Therefore with great reason it was recorded, that great was the faith of Saint George, whereby he was corroborated and made valiant to deliver this commonwealth of the like cruel and execrable monster, which daily devoured so many oxen, sheep, and other cattle, and at last all reasonable creatures, until by the fatal lot the king's daughter was in danger and appointed to be devoured. Neither must you imagine, that this infernal dragon doth devour so many creatures, as it were consuming them, but by sleight, devices and stratagems, he causeth them to destroy one another, in such sort as I have determined to tell you.

But first I will tell you in what manner, and by what means the inhabitants of this Island did live before this monster was bred in hell, next what the conditions and qualities are of those that be in league with him. And lastly what practices this dragon useth with every member of our weal public, to the general destruction thereof. O Codrus of Athens, wert thou alive to destroy this serpentine dragon, that creepeth not upon his belly, as the serpent of Paradise was condemned to do, and feedeth not on earth, but domineereth on his four indented Harpyon feet, feeding on the most precious meat, which doth command all other meats and delicacies. And behold his cruelty by so much the greater, as most usually this meat is prepared unto him by the poorer sort, and upon them he feedeth most greedily. And whether ever that serpent went skipping upon his tail before the curse, I know not: but I am sure this beareth his tail aloft like a conqueror, riding in his triumphant chariot. The curse of the Scripture denounced against him is neglected, the writings of Divines hath no efficacy, the Canonists cursings is without virtue, the prohibition of Civilians is overcome by the toleration of the Statute Law, and the manner of men's actions before this monster did tyrannize, is clean forgotten, whereas Lycurgus did banish this canker worm out of Sparta, Amasis did punish him severely in Egypt, Cato did banish him also out of Sicilia, and Solon did condemn him in Athens. And should not we do the like, if some Lucullus would deliver us of this contagion, wherewith we are infected, when as Sergius Galba being precedent of Africa, under the Emperor Claudius, caused one to be punished with death by famine, for feeding and entertaining this monster, which like a whirlpool swalloweth whatsoever it catcheth?

The inhabitants of this noble Island did live by the natural richesses of the lands they were borne unto, or by the artificial riches they were bred unto, according to their education & profession, every man using and enjoying his own, & nothing but his own, which in regard of charity every man possessing, yet seemed not to possess at all: Clergy men and magistrates did live by their revenues and pensions, Noblemen and Gentlemen of their lands, husbandmen by their farms, merchants and citizens by their trade, artificers by their craft and handiwork; all of them making a perfect consent and harmony of the government of a commonwealth, in proportionable manner with exercise of religion, and due administration of justice in time of peace, and necessary provision for war, which the Prince is to provide for in the two seasons of peace and war. And from the Prince as from a lively fountain all virtues did descend into the bosom of that commonwealth, his worthy counsellors were with the magistrates as ornaments of the Law, and did ministrate (like Physicians to the weal public) good potions for the ridding out of all distemperate humours: every man was contented to live in his vocation with true obedience: so that experience itself made manifest proof, justice to be ordained of God, as a measure amongst men one earth, to defend the feeble from the mighty, for the suppressing of injuries, and to root out the wicked from among the good, prescribing how to live honestly, to hurt no man wilfully, and to render every man his due, carefully furthering what is right, and prohibiting what is wrong: to which intent every man did endeavour himself for the good of the commonwealth, observing concord, & all things in the course of traffic were carried with an equality, free lend was used, hospitality maintained, commiseration towards the poor was exercised, and love which is the very sum and substance of the Law, did flourish to the general comfort of a Christian society.

But since the accursed coming of this hell hound, the concord is broken, charity is grown cold, inequality is crept in, by falsifying our measure: the general rule, Do as thou wouldst be done unto, is broken, free lend is banished, oppression must needs flourish, and no man seemeth to be contented to live in his vocation, as though Pride sitting upon the highest degree, did contend with Ambition for pre-eminence. Brief, our commonweal will in time be more like a prison, where this beast with his adherents liveth like a jailor, with his family in pleasure and wealth, whiles all other weep and smart for it. Avarice found out this monster, which nourisheth idleness, and idleness is the bringer forth of evils.

Our society and weal public is furnished with six necessary things, namely divine service, judgement, arms, riches, arts and sustenance, all which are brought out of their due course and proportionable order, and those that have the managing thereof as Clergy men, Magistrates, Noblemen, Merchants, Artificers and Husbandmen, and such as are comprehended under these, cannot execute their charge according to their profession. For behold the insinuating dealings which this monster useth with some of the better sort, and his cruel proceedings with the inferior.

He giveth them ability to destroy one another, and many times the seven lean kine of Pharaoh do devour the seven fat kine, and yet prove no whit fatter themselves.

Some neglecting their charge, have their minds filled with worldly cares, and ability given them with Simon Magus to buy that which ought to be freely given, which maketh them to sell that which they should freely give.

Others he maketh with Ananias & Saphira to dissemble with God, tempering the holy Ghost, boasting of false liberality, being like clouds and wind without rain.

Hospitality is by his means turned into jack Drums entertainment, and and Laban and Nabal, two Churls in the Scripture mentioned, having but one name preposterously taken, as being too many, are propagated into an infinite number.

Others he causeth to measure God's blessings by worldly riches, and with the kite to mount exceeding high in outward show, but never looking upwards to heaven, having the eyes of their mind set and fixed below on worldly things.

Others do blow with him the windy bellows of the organs of vain glory, and without his help they should give but little sound.

Others do neglect to relieve the poor, and put innocent joseph (being in prison) in oblivion.

Others are by his means so enticed with the feeding of delicacies, that setting all religion aside with Festus, they accuse Saint Paul of madness, even in the presence of Agrippa.

Others he maketh with Lot to be so loitering and trifling in Sodom, that the Angel is fain to pluck them out with violence, when God is pleased to save them.

Others he maketh to go loaden with gold and silver, galling their souls until they be despoiled thereof by death, and cast into the loathsome stable of damnation: like unto the mules of Princes, going all the day loaden with treasure, and covered with fair clothes until they be shaken off into a sorry stable.

Others he maketh void of all charity, which will lend no money but for gain, unto such men as they esteem to be good, but nothing to the poor man, although the pawn of the Gospel doth assure them, that God is the poor man's surety, and will for his promise sake pay all men's debts, though the men be never so unthankful.

Others he maketh to use the Laws like unto cobwebs, to catch only little flies, and to have ability to purchase dignities.

Others have ability given them by the multiplicities of suits grounded upon bonds and counterbonds, to accumulate riches, and to incorporate farms, and to make unlawful enclosures of grounds, to the decay of many.

Others he causeth to account nothing to be science or learning, but that wherewith money is to be gotten to feed him withal, because they find that a lumpish blockhead churl, which hath no more wit than an ass, shall have many wise and good men in subjection and bondage, only for this, because he hath a great heap of gold and silver.

Others he causeth to put the king's daughter in danger, feeding thereupon with this dragon to the kings great loss and hindrance, if he have present occasion to use his reassure, which by the means of the dragon's tail may be exported.

Others having of this meat belonging unto the king, do detain the same into their hands to please this monster, and to share the booty between them.

Others he causeth to put the king in remembrance of certain old moth-eaten laws, of every man forgotten, as a way unto him honourable and profitable, having a show and colour of justice, and all this for to be meat for him to feed upon.

Others have a present greater ability given them to live licentiously, following whores, harlots, wine-tavernes, and many other unlawful games, to their utter destruction.

Others do augment by his means the number of vagabonds, which through idleness the (root of all mischief) do commit robbery and theft, and then are they destroyed by the gallows.

Others he causeth to spend their stocks by prodigal riot, sumptuous fare, and strange and proud new fangles in their apparel, growing insolent, and riding a gallop with a lame jade, and yet are they too, soon destroyed by war or otherwise.

Others having spent their goods, he beateth with the whores and harlots (like to the prodigal son) out of doors, when they have no more for him to feed upon.

Others he maketh to whet their knives upon a chalk stone, never sharping them, spending their time and dulling their wits, with the use of dicing and carding, when the box doth carry away the gains on both sides.

Others having devoured and consumed by his means all what they could come by, or had about them, do creep out like the vermin out of the nut, and then are they but newly borne.

Others he maketh not to be contented to live idle themselves like dorrers of that which others have laboured for, polling and shaving their tenants to the quick: but to carry about with them at their tails a great flock or train of followers: which being turned off, when he hath undermined their masters living, become unthrifty, and having never learned any craft whereby to get their living, fall a stealing, & are by the gallows cut off, if by wars they suffer not a commendable death.

Others he maketh to be like raging and roaring Lions, spoiling and devouring all that they can catch or come by.

Others have ability given them to be like unto great floods and swelling rivers, when they overflow their channels, and do break through their banks, by reason of their raging and violent stream, hurting what they find in their way, polling and pilling the richesse and substance of the silly weak and poor, filling their purses with the blood of innocents, and building their houses and dignities by the destruction of others.

Others he maketh wealthy and rich, and like sheep and kine which are put into pasturs to be prepared for the shambles, or like oxen wearing the garland against the day of their slaughter.

Hercules his exploit in killing the Serpent Hydra's was great, because it had many heads, and after the amputation of one, another did arise: But the heads of this monster do multiply without that any be cut off, and those that are infected therewith, are as swelling monsters, like unto those that are diseased with the dropsy, which the more they drink, the more increaseth their desire of drinking.

Some he causeth with Samson to discover the secret of their strength, unto Dalilah, and before they do perceive the same, their locks are shorn off suddenly, and their strength is taken away.

Others he causeth to bestow all their wealth upon the opinion of men, in gems and precious stones, as fit meat and commodious for him to feed upon, in hope that the folly of others shall pay for all: whereby he bringeth some to destruction; for these things increasing and not wearing away, neither being consumed, must of necessity consume others.

Others he causeth to devour one another, and by his posteriors he doth avoid them both as excrements.

Diana is prevented to cause Actaeon to be devoured of his own dogs. Hero and Leander may drown themselves without an Ocean. For this monster is the right firebrand which Samson put between the fox's tails to burn the ricks and standing corn, with the vineyards and olives. For the world consisting of strife, war, and discord, must needs bring a confusion, and fall into wasting, spoiling and destroying, when this monster doth augment the causes thereof.

Consider then, how justice and religion can flourish? the one showing us how we ought to live in this life, and the other teaching us of the life to come.

Will not religion suffer shipwreck in time, when charity decayeth and the bonds of love are broken, and diversities of opinions are the causes of Schisms? Shall I with the Philosophers describe justice to be of four sorts: Celestial, Natural, Civil and judicial: I shall but knock at a deaf man's door: yet in hope of the antiquity thereof, which (as Cicero saith) will make the same flourish, I demand where Celestial justice (which is the perfect consideration and duty to God) is found, seeing that Natural justice, which all men should have amongst themselves by nature, is banished, which was the cause that Civil justice was made, grounded upon the law of nature, the statutes of the people, the consultation of the Senators, or the authority of grave and wise men, as the device of Princes, whereupon also judicial justice dependeth, for the commodity of the commonwealth. In regard whereof we are in hope that one day this monster shall be destroyed. For the better accomplishment whereof, I would our images of judges were erected again, having neither hands nor eyes. O Manlius Torquatus who shall imitate thee in the execution of of justice, not sparing thine own son?

The members of our commonwealth which have the managing of the natural and artificial riches, are dealt withal in most strange and subtle manner by this monster, which hath his principal delight therefore to feed upon them, & with his scornful look, recreating his mind with the internal misery of the mind of his leaguors, and with the external calamity of the body, & inward troubles of the mind of others, he beareth a wonderful sway.

Those that be in league with him, & become miserable in mind, he haled with a cable rope of unsatiable desires, causing them to make no period or comma from the highest Zodiac or Climate to the lowest Centre, & to be more foolish than Tantalus, amidst the water dying of thirst, obtaining with Midas the transmutation of all things they touch into gold, & starving for want of food: for they make by his instigation of abundance, indigence, to the end that by possessing more, they should have less, as not having a heart given them (as the wiseman saith) to enjoy their wealth

He maketh them think with the Ape that is tied to the clog, that he keepeth the clog, & not the clog him, for they keep not their riches, but riches keepeth them, and entangleth their minds.

He maketh them like unto the Ass which carrieth meat for his masters belly, & the clothes for his back, yet himself is contented to feed upon grass, and to wear a hair skin, for misery hath assaulted their souls.

He maketh them like unto the Indian Ants or Emmets, who gather the gold and keep it, although they cannot use it, and to hunt after goods, granting them only the sight, and not the use thereof: he maketh their riches to increase, as though he would make them contented, seeming to quench the fire by casting oil into it, and making them more covetous.

He causeth diverse to get their goods fraudulently, and by taking of forfeitures, which maketh them to hide their treasure, or to purchase lands therewith: when as their heirs shall unthritily spend that, which they have unlawfully gotten.

Some he maketh like unto the wolves of Syria, which delight to bark against the Moon, spending their time about nothing, and entertaining Podagra, for the most part of the year.

He caused him that did dream to have spent a great sum of money in a banquet, to have so strong an imagination, that by the apprehension thereof, thinking the same to be true, went to hang himself most desperately, having bought for the purpose a two penny halter, and being saved from hanging by the means of his friends which did cut the halter, would notwithstanding make his friends pay for that halter.

He caused the unthrifty son to hang himself, that gaping for his father's death for to enjoy the goods of this nature, became desperate upon the witch's declaration, that his father should yet live thirty years.

He caused that miser (who having hid his treasure in a hollow tree, and finding the same taken away) to hang himself, changing his treasure with the halter that a poor man left: who by the finding of this treasure was saved from hanging, being through the cruel dealings of others become desperate.

Some he causeth to have all their wealth in paper and ink, or parchment, which they account as precious as the golden fleece, multiplying the same in their imagination until they die, when as the debtors have of a long time been insolvent, and they deceived with false pleasure, like unto those who hiding their gold in the ground do deprive themselves of the use of it, hoping for joy: when as the gold having been stolen and they ignorant thereof, die ten years after, and all that ten years that they lived after the money was stolen, have fed themselves with a vain conceit.

Others he maketh to grow and spread as great oaks full of branches, by whose dropping he destroyeth and suffocateth the young little sprigs.

Others he causeth to be more doggish than the dogs themselves, which will sooner lick the ulcers and sores of Lazarus, than they will give any relief to the poor.

Others he causeth to sell their lands and goods, and to live obscurely, like unto the staring owl, which will not look upon the bright sun.

Others he maketh to seem that which they are not, like unto the hypocrites which are as a wooden leg set to the body, being no member thereof.

Others he maketh like unto mad men, desiring nothing so much as to get water, by reason of their excessive distemperature, when as there is nothing so much tormenting them; as the abundance of riches.

Others he maketh like unto the Moon when she is at the full, and then farthest from the sun of whom she hath her light: and so by increasing their riches, removeth them farther from God and godliness.

Others which be lean, like unto the hen which daily did lay an egg, or in poor estate did good deeds and were virtuous, he causeth to become fat, leaving the laying of eggs, and to become wealthy and vicious.

Others he maketh like hogs to feed upon acorns under the oak, and in steed to look thankfully upward, to devour the garment of him that feedeth them.

Others he causeth to be like unto the fawning Spaniel, which oftentimes fetcheth his masters glove, in hope to change it for a better morsel: doing a small pleasure, to the end they might reap a greater advantage.

Others he maketh to be like floods, which send their waters into the sea, and leave the dry land (which is thirsty) unwatered, bestowing or leaving their goods unto those that need them not.

Others are exalted like unto the ivy sticking to the boughs of trees, and yet by an overhard embracing do hinder the growing of the trees, making mean men to oppress their betters, by whose means they have been advanced.

Others he maketh to live idle, and their brains to become a shop for the devils Alchemy, sowing tars amongst the wheat, whiles men are asleep, setting with the traitorous servant, the door open to the thief.

Others he maketh to think that the increase of riches cometh by their own means: whereas with king Kanutus who in this Island would have commanded the waters, they should learn, that they were commanded by the heavenly power.

Others he maketh like unto the two thieves of Esop's fable, the one stealing, and the other the receiver or conueyer.

His strength lieth chiefly in his tail: for trial whereof, even for his recreation and sport, after a full stomach, he will many times encounter with great Elephants, clapping his tail about their milpost legs, and never leaving them until he have felled their unwieldy bodies to the ground.

But behold his subtle proceedings, for he will not only change colours with the Chameleon, but also weep for their overthrow with the Crocodiles tears, when as he intended to make them instruments to serve his turn.

With the wild boar and swine, which are wont to eat and destroy all other corn, he will beware of bearded wheat, because of the pricky beards which do hurt him, as the authority of great men. Yet sometimes like the boar franking in his sty, he will consume men of many miles off, by the means of his leaguors and attendants, whereby he knoweth the lands and abilities of noble men and gentlemen, yeoman and husbandmen, and here he will gobble up a whole town, and there a goodly park, here a Lordship or Manor, and there a most pleasant wood.

Some he causeth to weave continually Penelope's cloth, undoing by night that which they made in the day, and losing one way that which they get another way.

Others he setteth on Icarian wings with wax, and maketh them to fly even above the clouds, when as the wax by the heat of the sun dissolving, they are drowned unawares.

Others that upon pleasure entertain him, and have taken him up out of the snow, being almost dead with the snake of AEsope, do find him ready to bite of their throat in process of time.

Others he causeth to serve his turn, whose labour like unto the Cat's paw, he maketh to serve as the Ape did, to take the chestnuts out of the fire for his own use.

Others he maketh with the hawk to mount so high, trusting to their wings and other men's feathers, that they lose themselves, and their wit and wisdom is overcome.

Others he maketh so poor, that they are always in prison, forthcoming, but never coming forth.

Others he causeth always to be waited on by sergeant, and their cloaks cannot take hold at a butcher's hook, but they imagine that the sergeant Mace taketh them by the back.

Others he playeth withal like the Cat with the mouse for a time for to eat her up, or like the fly about the candle, and in the end are brought to destruction.

Others he maketh like unto Aesop's jay, clad with the feathers of other birds, which being discovered and stripped of all, for a reward are thoroughly scorned, and turned from their scarlet Gowns, into black threadbare cloaks.

Others he maketh like unto bondmen and slaves, that though they toil and labour never so much, all is for their masters, and they get nothing for themselves.

He causeth Mariners to conspire against their ships, and the devil Bommery to arise to boar holes to make them sink and perish.

He maketh many owners of ships, and by their discord to destroy shipping. For he is like unto the worm called of Pliny Teredo, that breedeth in timber, which being touched or handled seemeth gentle and soft, and yet hath so hard teeth that he destroyeth all manner of wood.

He draweth with the Lady Claudia, the ship wherein the idol of the Goddess Bona is, and maketh that the Mariners (like unto the young men) not once do stir.

He causeth the water to get in secretly, and to increase by the Pumps of their ships, so that both they and their ships are drowned.

He causeth many apprentices to become untimely masters, when as swimming with other men's bladders, they are soon drowned.

He maketh them to spoil their masters occupation and their own, and not to be able to live by that they were bred unto.

He maketh the husbandman unable to live by his farm, and giveth ability unto others to incorporate them to the decay of husbandry.

He maketh sheep to become devourers of men, destroying the lusty husbandmen which are always the best soldiers.

He maketh the husbandman to make money of his woods and trees, in pruning his old trees, and never to mipe or graff young sets, so that the woods do daily decay, and the trees die within few years.

He maketh them to sell their crops half for nought, and to buy such things dear as they have need of.

He will like a thorne-bush succour and shelter a poor silly sheep in some storm or tempest a little while: but when she departeth from the bush, keep back a piece of her fleece, and that so often until all be consumed.

He bringeth with the Bee sweet honey in his mouth, but a very sharp sting in his tail.

The horse of Gargantua had not so much strength in his tail as he hath, for the same being pricked of flies, did beat down with his tail, all the trees of a great wood. But this Dragon by the means of his tail causeth others to transport whole woods, with trees, houses and lands into foreign countries.

He maketh the prosperity of commonwealths to be like unto the grass on the house top, which for lack of root withereth afore it can grow up to be mown, and the Princes bare of flesh, and void of strength, like unto hearts that can find no pasture, for the commonwealths treasure (which he transporteth) is accounted theirs.

He is the cause that the king's treasure is like water powered into a siue or basket, which presently runneth out, and is never filled.

By the means of his tail he maintaineth a league with foreign nations, and causeth them to serve his turn, by bringing in superfluous commodities at a dear rate, and they to feed upon our native soil, to the commonwealths destruction.

He doth falsify our weight and measure, and bringeth thereby inequality, to our overgreat hindrance, making of money a merchandise.

He carrieth out our treasure in bullion and money, impoverishing our commonweal, in giving us chalk for cheese, making us like unto Aesop's dog, going over a bridge to snatch at the shadow of the flesh, losing the flesh itself.

He causeth us to spend far above our revenues, and maketh us to buy more than we sell, and to sell our home commodities good cheap, and to pay dear for the foreign commodities, all tending to our destruction.

He feedeth upon both kinds of commodities, and maketh the husbandman unable to live by his farm, and the merchant by the trade of our own commodities.

He bringeth inequality between the estimation of the natural riches and the artificial riches, and a great part of our wealth to be imaginative.

He giveth ability unto landed men to incorporate more lands and farms converting arable ground into pasture to the decay of husbandry, and destruction of soldiers.

He giveth ability to the grower, not to have cause to bring his corn or cattle to the market, but rather to engross more, and to sell them dear, or to have it transported unto other nations.

He is the cause of dilapidations of cities and towns, and depopulations of inhabitants, with the decay of their occupations and handiwork.

He gnaweth the poor artificer to the bones, and sucketh out the blood and marrow from him, feeding on him most greedily.

He causeth by the incorporation of many farms into few men's hands, the king's subsidy much to decrease, and the king's rewards or recompenses to be supplied diverse ways.

He is like Naa● the Ammonite warring against the men of Iabes Gilead, who would not raise his siege, but upon condition that he might thrust out all their right eyes, for he putteth out the right eyes of the judgement of governors, in the course of politic government, to bring commonweals to destruction.

He is the cause of rebellion and variance in countries, which many times is imputed unto the governors thereof, and maketh men generally unable to live by the natural or artificial riches whereunto they were borne or bred.

He maketh in some barren and unfruitful years many thousands of people to starve for hunger, and yet diverse men's barns to be well furnished with corn.

He setteth up pride and new fangled apparel, by the means of the merchant that bringeth in those commodities which please men's humours, for pride doth not measure wealth and prosperity by her own commodities, but by the misery and incommodity of other.

He giveth ability to intemperance the daughter of excess, which maketh men slaves to the mouth and belly, bringing them both ways to destruction.

He maketh money to be the creed of the world, and persuaded men to seek first money, and that honesty than will follow of course, and that learning and wisdom is nothing without it.

He causeth men to commence suits in law for every trifle, and exaction and extortion to flourish, relying upon the penalties and forfeitures of bonds and counterbonds.

He striketh out with the raven, first of all the sheeps eyes, and so bringeth to pass that men cannot see the way to escape his tyranny.

He is the right Cannibal, feeding only upon raw flesh, especially of men, and like an Apothecary he covereth his bitter bills with some sweet substance, to make them to go down the easier.

He maketh men to fall into the mire, & the more they stir, the more are they defiled and brought into his danger: for like a bitter and pinching black frost, he killeth and destroyeth the tender, sweet and beautiful blossoms.

He will not have men to depend upon the reward of God, but upon the reward of man, for charity and free lending he causeth to be banished, and preferreth the brittle metal before the eternal treasure.

He maketh the hearts of his leaguors not to be inflamed with a true and sincere love to God: but to be wide open unto all temptations, like unto a pot full of sweet liquors over the fire (which not boiling) are corrupted by flies, and they are become the wolves of our Island, since that all other wolves have been destroyed: for they devour both lean and fat sheep.

He maketh men generally like unto the decreasing moon, having here open side hanging downward, & their hearts set only on worldly things, whereas with the moon increasing & open towards heaven, they should be gathering light, and not step aside to gather feathers, and leave to run the golden game of inestimable value.

He maketh men to be discontented, and to judge as bondmen do of those that are free, never being contented with their state, always beholding how much inferior they are unto others.

And to conclude, whereas every well governed commonwealth is to keep a certain equality concerning the traffic between them and other countries, & a concord amongst the members of their commonwealth, when every member thereof liveth contentedly in his vocation, this dragon hath brought in discord and inequality. And if this Gangrena be not cured, it will in time subvert the whole state of the realm, for Sinon's horse was not so dangerous to the Trojans, as this dragon is to our commonwealth.

Conceive now (I pray you) in your imagination on the one side, the cruelty of this monster, and his subtle practices and dealings, and on the other side the meekness and innocency of the creatures devoured by him and by his means. And because the consideration there of would amaze your judgement, do but remember the tender and inexplicable love of a father towards his child, and especially of a most victorious king towards his fair & peerless daughter: the bright splendent beams of whose angelical beauty, do dim my sight, and captivate my understanding. Hide Absalon thy clear guilt tresses, and you Hester your meekness & beauty, giving place to this Virgin and noble creature; you Penelope, Marcia, Lauine and Helleni, make no comparison with her: neither you Lucrece and Polyxena, Dido, Laodomia or Tisbe, that have bought your love so dear; or thou Cleopatra with all thy passions, you all may be handmaids unto her: for her melodious voice doth command the heathen Gods, Bacchus, Pan, Ceres & Minerva, and by her sweet breath a second life is inspired into you all. Venus herself giveth her the pre-eminence, for the strength of Cupid without her countenance will soon decay, his fiery darts will soon be cold, and his wings lose their vivacity. Mars, Pallas and Bellona cannot subsist, if this Virgin should withdraw her favour, she remaineth still a Virgin immaculate, though all the world seemeth to be contaminated by her, for her constancy is singular, she is bright shining as the Moon, although the Eclipse doth darken her for a time, to make her brightness to appear more glorious: and albeit she received her light from the transparent Sun, yet in a manner she seemeth to be predominant, and by a voluntary love to command, for she is the rose of the field, and the lily of the valleys, whose fragrant smell as the savour of good ointments poured out, doth rejoice and make glad the king, and maketh him run after her, for his soul loveth her, and he hath brought her into his chamber, where like a bundle of myrrh she lieth between his breasts, his left hand is under her head, and his right hand doth embrace her, for she is fair and pleasant. She came accompanied with a Lamb representing her innocency, her amiable eyes the messengers of her perplexed heart, distilling salt tears, did wound & penetrate the cruelest mind: the locks of her golden hanging hair did adorn her as a triumphant Goddess: her ivory white teeth stood like a flock of sheep in good order: from her scarlat lips did drop the sweetness of honey combs, for honey and milk was under her tongue, and the savour of her garments was odoriferous as the smell of Lebanon: her strait snow white neck like a pretty tower of ivory was compassed with chains of oriental pearl, wearing the garland of her virginity of most precious stones, as a royal Diadem: and yet from her two breasts (which were like two young Roes that are twins feeding among the lilies) two lively fountains of celestial water did run, nourishing an infinite number: her cheeks were as a bed of spices, and as sweet flowers delectable: the joints of her fingers were delicate, making the whiteness of her hands to have a strong attraction. For in brief such was her perfection, that Dame Nature was ashamed to see herself overcome and vanquished of her own work: her admirable body was covered with a garment of white silk Damask hanging loose about her, embroidered with letters of gold Patientia victrix, wherein the Sun with the assistance of AEolus did seem to play her illustration, with the repercussion of the variety of colours of the garments of the Virgin's following her.

Consider now the agony of her mind tempered with magnanimity, notwithstanding the aggravating thereof by the lamentation of her associates, and although the lot cast for her was not so fatal as the rash vow of Jephtha was to his daughter: yet she had greater cause to go to the mountains with her companions, to lament and bewalie her virginity, because the devouring of the dragon was far more crueler than the fire wherewith Jephthah's daughter is said to have been consumed; when as this Virgin being brought up like a king's daughter in all pleasures and delicacies, was brought to the sight of this cruel monster, and that she was ready to abandon her ornaments, preparing her gentle body to his cruelty with a perfect patience.

If Griselde was worthy of commendation, and obtained the name of Patient, for being advanced by the marquess of Saluzze, who took her from a poor estate to be his wife, and afterwards to try her, made a show to relinquish her again, under colour that he would have married another, which (unknown unto her) was her own daughter had by him, and thereupon deprived her of all her ornaments; if she (I say) was renowned for enduring all this patiently, much more without all comparison is the patience of this rare Virgin to be had in perpetual remembrance, who abandoning all her peculiar prerogatives and pleasures, suffered her body to be expounded to the cruelty of this monster. And the greater was the exploit of Saint George in delivering her, who like a valiant champion being arrived into this Island, and understanding of the danger she was in, came with a Princely resolution to deliver her, mounted on a pyball horse of several colours, armed like a conqueror, to fight the combat with the shield of faith, having on the breastplate of righteousness, the helmet of salvation, his loins girt about with verity, and being adorned with the livery of the Cross, did with the sword of the Spirit destroy this monster, and delivered this Indian Phoenix & this Island, of that contagion & abominable hell hound, being not moved or amazed at his terrible sight and fashion; neither regarding those that were in league with this dragon, or took upon them to speak in his defence.

What unspeakable joy came thereby, let the consideration ravish your mind, and ease me of the amplification thereof. For I must now exactly describe unto you this dragon concerning his compounded body, as I have already done his properties, and the effects of his mischievous condition and qualities.

His ordinary mansion (I have told you) to be about the middle part of the city, which is beset with many grasshoppers round about, without any green fields whereon to feed, for they be not wild, savage, or noisome, diverse of those that be in league with the dragon are like toads, which drink the juice of grapes so fast, till overcharged with the broth, their bowels do burst, casting their venomous poison and infecting many, and yet the air is soft, temperate and gentle.

Here may you behold this hideous monster, swelling every month bigger one than another, with his fiery flaming eyes, seeming to cast fire at every moment, by the means of his tri●●●ted tongue like unto a Turkish dart, his body unwieldy like an Elephant, but his tail nimble, & continually wavering & inconstant, for therein consisteth his greatest strength & activity, to the commonwealths destruction: and the same is marked with the new Moon of the Turks, like unto the letter C, and his forehead with an F, like a felon, he walketh upon his four Harpion legs, like a thief closely to surprise any man either by night or day: for he omitteth no time, albeit he seemeth with the index of the dial not to move, when he is continually moving, and stirred in such sort, that when men begin to perceive his motion, and pretend to run from him: he doth so allure them, that the more they run, the more he seemeth to follow them, as the moon doth to the little children, whereby his motion is the less regarded. He rideth upon the wings of time, and by imagination hasteneth the course thereof: so that he that sitteth surest may be overthrown, for he hath two wings to fly withal, the one having an internal strength from the mind, and the other an external from the body: that of the mind is (as it were) covered with a vail: but the other is plain and naked: howbeit both of them are indented with several branches, wherewith according to the Adage, the Devil seemeth to be God to some body, and maketh those to speak in his defence. For in abusing justice to the hurt of many, he seemeth to do good unto some particular: these therefore (although they be ashamed of him) do allow him as a necessary member in a commonwealth, like unto the hangman which for executions sake must needs be had. Others do compare him to be admitted, as the husbandman suffereth many weeds to grow in his ground which he likes not, and that so he is to be tolerated; when as in the like manner they might speak for murderers and thieves, and say that the natural rule (Do as thou wouldst be done unto,) is to be taken general without any exception in all things and in all respects: whereby the Magistrate must of love spare the convicted malefactor: for if he were in the malefactor's case, he would be glad to be spared and pardoned himself: albeit they would not be bound by this rule, to give all their goods unto another, seeing their gripple mind is such, that they would willingly an other man should give them all his substance. They would be contented to have money freely lent them, yet they would lend none freely themselves, for (say they) I must make a gain of my money, which is as lawful for me to take, as others do of the rents of their houses, revenues of lands, or gains of corn and cattle, or wares and merchandizes: whereas they do not consider, that money was ordained as a pledge or right betwixt man and man, and in contracts and bargaining a just measure and proportion, which measure is by them falsified: and this monster causeth them to incorporate the same, so that no man can come by it without their consent and paying for it, falsifying and altering the same. And yet can they find fault, and hold for very absurd, if upon plenty or scarcity of corn, or abundance of cloth, or scarcity thereof, the measure or yard should be altered upon all occasions, considering that a measure ought to remain at a certainty. But what cannot this dragon bring to pass? when he will seem to be a protector of orphans, as though Magistrates or tutors could not provide for them, for unless he should carry some show of good, he could never have reigned so long: he seemeth to favour justice, for if any man borrow money for an other, and do enter his bond for it, and take of him the like that received the money, he will see him that borrowed the money recover that by law ex damno habito which he is damnified, albeit there be means otherwise to satisfy him. Again, if a shopkeeper lend money freely to his neighbour till such a day, having then occasion to use it at some fair to lay it out in wares, if he break touch, he helpeth the shopkeeper with all extremity under colour of justice ex lucro cessant, to recover so much as he sustained loss for want of his money to lay out; as if at an other time the other could not lend him the like sum of money, and make him recompense another way. Whereas these events come to pass upon abuses which this monster hath brought in, having with the operation of his tail (being a very Canker) transported the moneys of our Island, and within our land altered the nature and valuation of the money, making one hundred pounds, to be one hundred and ten pounds, and having overthrown charity and free lending. Hence did the cause proceed, that the statute laws were repealed, which did banish this monster, for therein it was like unto the water which the more it is penned, the more it swelleth, and like a thief, who when he is locked in at the prison door, breaketh out at the windows, falling to his shifts, subtleties and devices. For if money had remained plentiful with us, this monster could never have prevailed, nor charity should have waxed so cold, neither casual and adventurous bargains would have been so hunted after. And to conclude, no law can do good which admitteth an inconvenience as a necessary evil.

I am not ignorant, that with a wet finger, some do point at those that are grown rich by the means of the feeding of this monster, which maketh me to remember a pretty history to my purpose. A man coming into a certain church, and seeing it fraught full of images made of wax, demanded what might be the cause of such an unwonted sight; answer was made, that those whom these images did represent, were certain persons, which on a time were saved from drowning by calling upon our Lady. Nay then (quoth he again) where be the images of those (I pray ye) that called upon our Lady and were drowned notwithstanding? So say I in this case, if any man will set before me the instances, and as it were the images of those who have fed this dragon, and yet are not become poor: I would demand on the other side, that he show forth the hundreds and thousands of those, whose estates and persons he hath devoured, they will be found a million for one, yea to be without all comparison: for this monster is an active element that consumeth all things.

He demandeth consideration for that which is none of his own, and moreover two recompenses for one entire thing: by reason whereof he bringeth forth inequality for his advantage, making men to forget that ever they lived without him, by that which they were borne or bred unto. But let this hideous monster be destroyed, and every man will return unto his quietness, and live within his bounds and calling, using such trade as he ought to do. Plenty will soon increase, and money will abound, if you take away but the strength of his tail, and we shall feel our liberty and deliverance.

Will not the danger that the leaguors of this Dragon do run into, give them warning, when as at one time five hundredth jews were transported with Charon's boat the ferry man of hell, which were slain by the Citizens of Troynovant for feeding him? Let the punishments assigned for them, put them in fear if they have any feeling.

The curse of God denounced against them in the holy Scripture, in Exodus 22. Leviticus 25. Psalm. 15. Ezechiel 18. and Luke the sixth chapter, expounded by the ancient and learned holy Fathers, upon which ground the temporal punishments have been ordained against those that should feed this monster: whereby their condemnation appeareth.

They are defamed persons by the law, and if any man make by his last will any goods unto them, the testament may be broken, neither should they be admitted to communicate with Christians, or enter into their congregation, or offer any oblation.

When they are dead, they should not be buried in Christian burial, and if they be, the doers thereof are excommunicated: for they are not worthy of such reverence, which dumb beasts, and even a silly Ass (who like unto Balaams' Ass was inspired) did manifest, for one of these leaguors being departed out of this world, a certain zealous & godly parson would not bury him, notwithstanding his great riches, whereof part was offered unto the parson to the same effect. Whereupon his friends understanding that the parson had an ass which brought his books from his parsonage daily to the church, being a pretty distance in sunder, they politikly desired to obtain this favour of him, that as his ass did daily carry his service books to the church, so it would please him, that for this one time the quick Ass might take pain to carry this dead ass in a Coffin; with this condition, that wheresoever the ass stayed, there the body should be buried, persuading themselves, that as the ass by an ordinary course, used every day to go from the parsonage to the church with a burden of books upon his back: so of course he would take the same way with this dead man's corpse being chested, even strait to the church; which being granted by the parson, had not that event. For the ass feeling a weightier burden upon his back then usually, did seek all the means to be disburdened, running and flinging along the streets, until he came to a pair of gallows at the towns end, and there did never leave tumbling and tossing himself upon the bare ground, till he was clean disburdened of so miserable a carrion, leaving a sacrifice to that altar as miraculously assigned for it: for it was not without cause that priests were forbidden to give unto such any ghostly comfort, but upon evident proof of repentance; also that they must make their wills without witness, which wills are not of any force except satisfaction be made, or else their goods to be forfeited to the higher powers, with many other hard censures which ought to move any reasonable man in the observation of so easy a commandment as to forbear to feed a monster unto whom Cerberus in hell, and all those monsters that Hercules subdued are inferior in evil. Alas poor creatures, how are you tossed with the waves of care to satisfy this dragon before you are destroyed? you know by experience, that the fear of death is more than death itself: what shifts, devices, or extremities are not you driven unto? Aristophanes hath painted forth your agonies and perplexed minds, under the person of an aged man altogether shipwrecked by freighting with this monster, who thinking to have found out the way to be eased of his slavery, did propound unto Socrates this demand: That if he should by a witch of Thessalia, and by her enchantments fetch the Moon out of heaven, and bring it away, and afterwards enclose it in a case of glass, and so keep it, as if he would keep a fly in a box: Socrates demanding, what good that would do him: he answered, If the Moon do never rise again, and I being constrained to feed this monster by the new Moon, shall be freed of that trouble. A strange shift, that this poor man was driven unto, to pluck by violence the Moon out of heaven for his help. For in truth the witch did her best, and began to charm the Moon, which when the leaguor of the dragon understood, did put him in such a pelting chafe, as was wonderful to hear: for accusing this poor man of enchantment, at last he went himself to another witch, not only to keep the Moon from coming out of heaven, but also to hasten the course of it faster, that the monster might be the sooner fed. Good God what a trouble was the Moon put unto between these two witches? What storms and tempests did arise? What horrible wind did blow? What great rain did fall? What floods ensued every where? What countries were almost drowned and under the water in many places? But herein (say some) was the dragon to be blamed, for troubling or oppressing a poor man, or feeding upon him, which he ought to have done upon the rich: for they conclude that to be lawful, in regard of the prohibition of the other; as who would say, it is not lawful to vex a poor man by law, therefore it is lawful to vex or trouble a rich man by law: whereas neither rich or poor, young or old, low or high, should be troubled or vexed at all to feed this monster: for it taketh away the chiefest comfort of the poor, which is the quietness of their minds, and devoureth their gain before it can be gotten; and to the rich it giveth ability to do all the mischief that can be devised, as I have told you. Others say Volenti non fit iniuria, when as money being made a merchandise, hindereth the course of commodities, and that even the politic course of our government driveth men to feed this monster, and for the most part upon an imaginative wealth, when by means of his tail he hath transported our treasure into foreign parts.

Arise thou o Prophet Daniel, and make known unto our most gracious king the deceits and cruelties of the false god Bell and of this dragon. Let the footsteps be seen of those that are in league with their false God Mammon and this Dragon, in the ashes of the efficacy of holy Scripture, and our most wholesome laws, and let them be used as pitch, fat and hair, to burst this Dragon in sunder.

He is not contented with the spending daily of twelve great measures of fine flower, forty sheep, and six great pots of wine: but he consumeth thousands of measures of corn, innumerable flocks of sheep, and whole ships lading of wines, even with all the creatures that have the managing thereof: for he doth not feed threescore & ten priests with their wines and children only, but an infinite number that are in league with him and their followers, to the commonwealths destruction.

The aspect, countenance, and behaviour of creatures doth many times provoke love towards them. But behold his ugly and fearful countenance, his ill favoured shape and cruel behaviour, and you will wonder how it is possible that any man can love him.

With that, me thought he took me by the hand, and showed me a certain place, where this monster stood wallowing like a bear, which expecteth the coming of the dogs; presently all my senses did assail him, Prima fancy I saw him, than I imagined him and my fancy did delude me, as if I had seen some satire, halfe a man & half a beast, which made so deep an impression into my memory, that by the apprehension thereof, I was possessed with a great fear & ashonishment, which made me to cry and awake from slumber, remaining still pensive above measure: for on the one side I know the passions of men and the debility of nature, and on the other side I do consider the difference betwixt dreams and visions.

Such are the natural passions of men, that some not fearing to fight with the strongest and stoutest man, will notwithstanding cry out, and sweat at the sight of a cat, or any other abject creature: others are always in fear, if they be alone, and cannot abide to have their doors locked in private: nay, some cannot endure the pointing of a finger or any gesture towards them, or but the rehearsing or telling of a dream, for they do for the time participate so much of the melancholic humour, that reason and discretion is not able to conquer it: dreams being provoked according to the disposition of the mind and of the body, and dilating into fancies and illusions, I can hardly conclude them to be visions; for visions are really seen, and fancies are but represented or imagined.

But howsoever this came to pass, and may be importeth little, so long as the moral of it declareth with all the history of Saint George, wishing with all my heart, that I might have seen also that valiant champion prefigured unto me as the dragon was, for then no doubt the deliverance expected and long required would ensue; and this my dream (howsoever displeasing to some) might be admitted for a vision to the welfare of the commonwealth.

Covetousness the root of all evil, brought forth the tree of Political usury, whose root with the body and branches, together with their operations and effects in the course of politic government, we have laid open in this treatise under certain Metaphors and Similes, the Moral whereof we do leave to thy good construction and amplification. For albeit that the substance with the application of the effects thereof is here declared: yet upon due consideration many branches more may be handled, which the divines at their pleasure may apply and amplify, for they have the word of God for their warrant, without which all human policy is vain. So that as he would be accounted foolish, that would take upon him to plant or set a fruitful tree into a vault or seller, where the Sun hath no operation: much more without all comparison are those foolish, that will seem to set this tree of Political usury in the government of any commonwealth, seeing that the same is both deprived of the blessings of the most glorious Sun, and accompanied with the heavy curse of Gods most holy word. For with this holy word all human laws should agree and concur, notwithstanding that the laws are said to he made according to the people of every country, and every country to have his influences according to the climate, whereas many of such laws might be abolished, if the causes of offences were prevented, among the which usury is the chiefest, and giveth therefore just cause of admiration that politicians will any manner of ways suffer the same. Wise was that politician who perceiving that there was not any punishment so horrible to punish theft, that it could keep men from stealing, would have Magistrates not to be like evil schoolmasters, which be readier to beat then to teach their scholars: But rather to prevent the causes, & to provide means whereby men might get their living, whereby no man should be driven to this extreme necessity, first to steal, and then to die: the chief cause of this necessity or poverty is usury, which doth too much enrich some few, and doth impoverish too much a great many. So that men cannot live contentedly and proportionably in their vocation, according to their profession, taking away the chiefest comfort of the poor, which is the quietness of their minds, and giving ability to the rich to do all the mischief that can be devised: which being duly considered of, will no doubt in process of time work effectually for the good of the realm. Mean time I pray God that we may all become Spiritual usurers in the Lord, using pity and compassion towards our neighbours, for which God himself will pay usury: to whom be all honour, praise and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
