THe trade of Merchandise, is not only that laudable practice whereby the intercourse of Nations is so worthily performed, but also (as I may term it) the very Touchstone of a kingdom's prosperity, when therein some certain rules shall be diligently observed. For, as in the estates of private persons, we may account that man to prosper and grow rich, who being possessed of revenues more or less, doth accordingly proportion his expenses; whereby he may yearelie advance some maintenance for his posterity. So doth it come to pass in those Kingdoms, which with great care and wariness do ever vent out more of their home commodities, than they import and use of foreign wares; for so undoubtedly the remainder must return to them in treasure. But where a contrary course is taken, through wantonness and riot; to over waste both foreign and domestic wares; there must the money of necessity be exported, as the means to help to furnish such excess, and so by the corruption of men's conditions and manners, many rich countries are made exceeding poor, whilst the people thereof, too much affecting their own enormities, do lay the fault in something else.

Wherefore, industry to increase, and frugality to maintain, are the true watchmen of a kingdom's treasury; even when, the force and fear of Prince's prohibitions cannot possibly retain the same.

And therefore, as it is most plain, that proportion or quantity, must ever be regarded in the importing of foreign wares; so must there also be a great respect of quality and use; that so, the things most necessary be first preferred; such as are food, raiment, and munition for war and trade; which great blessings, when any country doth sufficiently enjoy; the next to be procured are wares, fitting for health, and arts; the last, are those, which serve for our pleasures, and ornament.

Now, forasmuch, as by the providence of almighty God, the kingdom of England, is endowed with such abundance of rich commodities, that it hath long enjoyed, not only great plenty of the things before named, but also, through a superfluity, hath been much enriched with treasure brought in from foreign parts; which hath given life unto so many worthy trades, amongst which that unto the East India by name; the report whereof, although it is already spread so famous through the world; yet notwithstanding, here at home, the clamorous complaints against the same, are grown so loud and general; that (my self being one of the Society it hath much troubled my private meditations, to conceive the means or true grounds of this confusion. But at the last I resolved myself, that the greatest number of these exclaimers, are led away in ignorance; not having as yet, discerned the mysteries of such weighty affairs; Some have been transported with envy, as not participating in the said Society, or being thereby hindered (as they conceive) in some other trade; and others, wholly corrupted in their affections; who whilst they willingly run into these errors, do also labour diligently to seduce others; that so, this good and glory of the kingdom, might be subverted by ourselves, which by the policy and strength of Strangers, cannot so easily be abated; wherefore, it is now a fit time to meet with such injurious courses, by a true Narration of the passages in the said East-India Trade; answering to those several objections, which are so commonly made against the same; That so these misunderstandings and errors may be made known unto the whole body of this Kingdom, which at this present time is most worthily represented in those noble assemblies of the high Courts of Parliament; where I hope the worth of this rich Trade, shall be effectually inquired, and so in the end obtain the credit of an honourable approbation.

It were a happy thing for Christendom (say many men) that the Navigation to the East-Indies, by way of the Cape of Good hope, had never been found out; For in the fleets of ships, which are sent thither yearly out of England, Portugal, and the Low countries; The gold, silver, and Coin of Christendom, and particularly of this Kingdom, is exhausted, to buy unnecessary wares.

THe matter of this Objection is very weighty; and therefore, it ought to be answered fully; the which that I may the better perform, I will divide the fame into three parts.

1 In the first, I will consider, the necessary use of the wares, which are usually brought out of East-India into Europe; namely, Drugs, Spices, Rawsilke, Indicoe, and Calicoes.

2 In the Second; I will intimate the manner and means, by which the said wares have been heretofore, and now are brought into Europe.

3 In the Third and last; I will prove, that the Treasure of England, is not consumed, but rather greatly to be increased by the performance of the said Trade.

Touching the First; Who is so ignorant, in any famous common wealth, The First part concerneth the use of Indian wares. which will not consent to the moderate use of wholesome Drugs and comfortable Spices? Which, have been so much desired in all times, and by so many Nations; not thereby to surfeit, or to please a liquorish taste (as it often happeneth, with many other fruits and wines) but rather as things most necessary to preserve their health, and to cure their diseases; even as it is most notably set forth, Sir. Thomas Elyot his Castle of health. Rembert Dodoneus his history of Plants. The French Academy second part, and others. by some learned men, who have undertaken, to write upon this subject; and therefore; it shall be altogether needless here to discourse upon their several operations and virtues, seeing that, he that listeth, may be well instructed therein, if he will peruse the volumes, which are penned by the learned, for the benefit of all those, who shall make use thereof.

Sir. Thomas Elyot his Castle of health. Rembert Dodoneus his history of Plants.

The French Academy second part, and others.

But if peradventure, it be yet further urged; that diverse Nations, live without the use of Drugs and Spices: the answer is, That either such people know not their virtue; and therefore, suffer much by the want of wares so healthful; or else, they are most miserable; being without means to obtain the things, which they so much want; but sithence I intent to be brief, I will insist no further upon this point; For the Obiecters might aswell deny us the use of Sugars, Wynes, Oils, Raisins, Figgs, Prunes, and Currandes; and with far more reason exclaim against Tobacco, Cloth of gold and Silver, Lawns, Cambrics, Gold and Silver lace, Velvets, Satins, Taffaeties and diverse others manufactures, yearly brought into this Realm, for an infinite value; all which as it is most true, that whilst we consume them, they likewise devour our wealth; yet nevertheless, the moderate use of all these wares hath ever suited well with the riches and Majesty of this Kingdom.

But I will come to the Raw-silkes and Indigo; this being so excellent for the dying of our woollen-cloathes, thereby so much esteemed in so many places of the world; that ornament, together with the great relief and maintenance of so many hundreds of poor people; who are continually employed, in the winding, twisting, and weaving of the same; Insomuch, that by the cherishing of this business (as his Majesty, for his part is graciously pleased to perform, in remitting the impost of Silk) it may well be hoped, that in short time, France and the Low Countries of late years do make great quantities of wrought silk, of which wares they were heretofore served from Italy. industry will make the art to flourish, with no less happiness to this Kingdom, than it hath done (through many ages) to divers states in Italy, and lately also to the Kingdom of France, and to the united Provinces of the Low countries.

Now as touching the Trade of Calicoes, of many sorts, into which the English lately made an entrance; although it cannot be truly said, that this commodity is ptoffitable, for the state of Christendom in general (in respect they are the manifacture of Infidels, and in great part the wear of Christians) yet nevertheless, France, Italy, South Barbary, and other Countries. this commodity, likewise is of singular use, for this common wealth in particular; not only therewith to increase the Trade into foreign parts; but also thereby, greatly to abate the excessive prices of Cambrics, Holland, and other sorts of Linen-cloth; which daily are brought into this Kingdom for a very great sum of money. And this shall suffice concerning the necessary use of the Indian wares; The Second part showeth the manner & the means by which Indian wares have been and now are brought into Europe. In the next place, I will set forth the manner and means of their importing into Europe.

It is an error in those men; who think that the Trade of the East-Indies into Europe had first entrance, by the discovery of the Navigation by the Cape of Good-hope. For many years before that time, the traffic of those parts, had his ordinary course by shipping from divers places in the Indies; yearly resorting with their wares to Mocha in the Red-Sea, and Balsera in the Persian-Gulfe: From both which places, the Merchandise (with great charges) were after transported overland by the Turks upon Camels, 50. days journey, unto Aleppo in Soria, and to Alexandria in Egypt, (which are the Mart Towns, from whence divers Nations, as well Turks, as Christians, do continually disperse the said wares by Sea into the parts of Europe:) by which course, the common enemy of Christendom (the Turk) was Master of the Trade; which did greatly employ, b b Rates upon all sorts of Spices. 22. per cent. Rawe-Silkes esteemed about 2. per cent. Indigo about 8. per cent. and enrich his Subjects, and also fill the Coffers of his own customs, which he exacted at very high rates; But by the providence of almighty God, the discovery of that Navigation, to the East-Indies by the Cape of Goodhope (now somuch frequented by the English, Portingalls, and Dutche; and also attempted, by other Christian Kingdoms) hath not only much decayed the great commerce, between the Indians and the Turks in the Red Sea; and in the Persian Gulf (to their infinite hurt, and to the great increase of Christian trade,) but it hath also brought a further happiness unto Christendom in general, and to the Realm of England in particular, for the venting of more English commodities; and for exporting of a less quantity of silver out of Europe, unto the Infidels, by many thousand pounds yearly, then hath been accustomed in former times; as I shall prove most plainly by that which followeth.

And First, it will be necessary to set down the quantity of Spices, Indigo, and Persian Rawsilke (which is yearly consumed in Europe) and in them all to consider the cost with the charges to lad the same commodities clear aboard the Ships from Aleppo; and the like of all the self same wares, as they have been usually dispatched from the Ports of the East-Indies; wherein, will appear that happiness, which many do so much oppose; especially our own Countrymen, under the gilded terms of the Commonwealth; whilst being indeed either ignorant, Such people as affect not the good of this Kingdom or ill affected, they do not only grossly err themselves, but also cause others to hinder as much as in them lieth, the glory and welfare of this Kingdom; but leaving them, I will set down the said wares, in their quantity and prizes as followeth; and first,

At Aleppo. The quantity of Spice, Indigo, and Persian Rawsilke, yearly consumed in Europe. ll l s d 6000000. of Pepper, cost with charges at Aleppo at 2. s the l. 600000. 00 00 450000. of Cloves at 4. s. 9 d. the pound 106875. 10 00 150000. of Mace at 4. s 9 d the pound 35626. 00 00 400000. of Nutmegs, at 2. s 4. d the pound 46666 13 04 350000. of Indigo at 4. s 4. d the pound 75833 06 08 1000000. of Persia raw silk at 12. s the po. 600000 00 00 1465001 10 00

Now followeth the same wares both for quantity and quality at their several prizes as they are to be bought and laden clear of charges.

In the East-Indies. ll l s d 6000000. of Pepper cost with charges in India 2. d ½ the pou. 62500 00 00 450000. Cloves at 9 d the pound 16875 00 00 150000. Maces at 8. d the pound 5000 00 00 400000. Nutmegs at 4. d the pound 6666 13 04 350000. Indigo at 14. d the pound 20416 12 04 1000000. Persia Rawsilke at 8. s the pou. 400000 00 00 511458 05 08

So that by the substance, and sums of these accounts, it doth plainly appear, that the buying of the said quantity of Raw-silkes, Indigo, and Spices, may be performed in the Indies, for near one third part of the ready monies, which were accustomed to be sent into Turkey to provide the same; The exportation of the value of 953543. l. starling out of Christendom into Turkey yearly saved. So that there will be saved every year the value of 953543.l. 4 s. 4. d. starling of ready monies, that heretofore hath been exported out of Christendom into Turkey ▪ which is a matter of such note and consequence, that it may seem incredible, before the circumstance be duly considered; and therefore lest I should leave the matter in doubt, it is requisite; that I do make an explanation of some particulars.

And principally, it must not be conceived, that this great advantage, which hath been spoken of ▪ is only the Merchant's gain; for the Commonwealth of Christendoe, hath a very great part thereof in the cheapness of the wares, as shall be (God willing) proved hereafter in his due place.

Secondly, the time of the Merchant's forbearance, and interest, is very long: his adventure and assurance much dearer; his charges of shipping, victuals, Mariners, and factors their wages, far greater, then by the voyage into Turkey for the same wares; so that the former great difference must be understood in these particulars; whereby we may perceive to our comfort, that the Materials of the kingdom, and the employments of the subjects (in lieu of ready monies) becomes a very great part of the price which is paid for the said Indian wares; Instance only, that ten shillings employed in Pepper in the East-Indies, will require thirty and five shillings for all charges whatsoever to deliver it in London. which cannot hurt the State (as some erroneously suppose) but greatly help it, as I shall better prove in that which followeth.

First therefore, I show for an undoubted truth, That the Persians, Moors and Indians, who trade with the Turks, at Aleppo, Mocha, and Alexandria, for Raw-silkes, Drugs, Spices, Indigo and Calicoes; have always made, and still do make, their returns in ready money: for other wares, there are but few which they desire from foreign parts; some Chamblets, Coral, wrought silk, woollencloth, with some trifles, they do yearly vent in all, not for above 40. or 50. thousand pounds starling; The great Sums of money which the Persians and the Indians carry yearly out of Turkey. which is no valuable sum in respect of that wealth which is carried from Aleppo and Constantinople into Persia for Raw-silkes, when least, 500000. pound's starling Per annum: and from Mocha about 600000. pounds' starling (likewise yearly into India) for return of Calicoes, Drugs, Sugar, Rice, Tobacco, and divers other things. So here is still a very great Commerce maintained between those Infidels; not only for the Calicoes of many sorts, and other wares (which concern their own use) but also for the Raw-silkes of Persia, which are altogether transported into Christendom.

How worthy an enterprise is it therefore in the English East-India Company? by whose endeavours, there is now good hope to turn a great part of this wealthy Trade into England, by shipping directly from the Persian-Gulfe, whereby the employments, The East-India Company do endeavour to bring the Raw-Silkes from Persia directly by Sea. traffic, and Customs of the Turks, may be still more and more impaired; & the general Treasure of Christendom? much less consumed; as is already performed for the business of Spices and Indigo.

And who shall then doubt our want of Silver to maintain the Trade? if by this way we do obtain the Silk, which with more advantage and conveniency, will draw the money to this Mart, than it hath been heretofore conveyed unto those remote dominions of the Turk.

And lest peradventure it should be thought, that the traffic in those parts by the Christians for the Persian Silk, is performed by change for other wares, or by the money which proceedeth of the sales of many rich commodities, which yearly they sell at Aleppo, Alaxandria, Constantinople, and these parts.

The answer is, that neither the Venetians; French, nor dutch, do vent so much of their own Country commodities in those parts, as do provide their necessary wants of the proper wares of Turks ▪ such, as are the fine Rawsilke, made in Soria, Chamblets, Grogerans, Cotten-woolles, Marseilles sendeth yearly to Aleppo & Alexandria at least 500000. l. sterling, and little or no wares. Venice sends about the value of 100000. l. and a great value in wares. The Lowcountries sends about the value of 50000. l. sterling moneys, and little wares. Messina 25000. l. in ready money. Cotten-yarne, Gauls, Flax, Hemp, Fleece-woolls, Rice, Hides, Wax, & divers other things; so that still the raw-silkes of Persia, must be bought with ready money. Only the English have more advantage than any other Nation in this kind, for they vent so great a quantity of broade-cloathes, tin, and other English commodities, that the proceed thereof, doth not only provide a sufficient quantity of part of the said Turkish wares (which fit their use,) but also a proportion of about 300. great balls of Persia Rawsilke yearly.

Marseilles sendeth yearly to Aleppo & Alexandria at least 500000. l. sterling, and little or no wares. Venice sends about the value of 100000. l. and a great value in wares.

The Lowcountries sends about the value of 50000. l. sterling moneys, and little wares. Messina 25000. l. in ready money.

And if in any year, they chance to buy a greater quantity of silk, then must and do they furnish the same in ready moneys from the Ports of Marseilles, Genovay, Leghorn, Venice, or the Netherlandes. Neither are these the only means, whereby the Empire of the Turk is so abundantly stored with God and Silver, to the performance of the Indian-trade. For, many are the Christian ships, which yearly lade with corn for ready moneys in the Archipelago; Great is the commerce from Poland, Hungary, and Germany, Abissians a people in Ethiopia whose influence hath made them dull, lazy and without arts; enjoying diverse Mines of Gold and one of Silver, which do procure their wants of foreign wares. with Gold and Dollars, for Chamblets, Grogerans, and other things: But that which is very remarkable, is the great quantity of gold & some silver coined in Grand-Cairo, which by two several Caravans (in bullion) is yearly brought thither from the Abissians country in Ethiopia, for return of many rich commodities, as Velvets, Satins, Cloth of Gold, Taffetas, Woollen-cloth: polished Coral, and other things.

Thus by the coherence of the Turkish-Trade with the Christians, Persians and Indians, I have showed both the manner and the means, whereby the East-Indians wares have been heretofore, and yet are, in part, procured into Christendom. But lest it should seem incredible, that the Turk would let so great a Mass of Treasure yearly to pass his Dominions, to the Indians and to the Persians his professed enemies: I will make the matter yet more plain.

And First, concerning the Raw-silkes, it is already showed, that he hath the money from the Christians, besides the benefit he reapeth in their customs, with great employments also for his Subjects. And for the Calicoes (his whole Empire having little or no other means for Linen) he cannot possibly be without them, Turkey hath little means for Linen but only from India. although it hath, & doth greatly exhaust his treasure, neither doth he gain any manufacture by the same, as the Christians have always done by the Rawsilke, to the great relief of innumerable poor people, so much provided for, by the policy of all well governed and flourishing commonwealths; As by this occasion, The proceedings of some States in Italy for the maintenance of Artes. and in a business of the like kind, I may instance the States of Genovay, Florence, and Luca; who for the maintenance of Arts and Trade, do provide Raw-silkes out of Sicilia for the value of 500000. pound's starling at least yearly; and for the payment thereof they do vent at Naples, Palermo, Messina, and those parts, a certain quantity of Florence ▪ Rash's and some other wares, for about 150000. pounds' starling per annum; So the rest, The ready moneys which are yearly carried from some States of Italy into Sicilia. being 350000. l. sterling, is supplied all in ready monies; which treasure they do willingly forsake, to procure their Trade; for experience hath taught them that Trade is their employment, and doth return them treasure; for by those silks (being wrought, transported and sold at Franckforde and other Marts) they have the better means, to furnish their contracts with the King of Spain in Flanders; and so from Spain the Silver must return again to Italy. But if I should run out in this and other particulars (fitting our purpose) it would make me too tedious, and so carry me beyond my aim, which is to be brief.

Wherefore, I will proceed to clear some doubts, in those men, who perhaps not having the knowledge of occurrents in foreign parts, might think, that neither Venice, nor Marseilles have the means or yet the minds, to export such great Sums of ready monies, yearly out of those Dominions; especially Marseilles being a part of France, where neighborhoode doth daily tell us, that gold and Silver, may not be conveied out of that Kingdom, for any valuable Somme, more than is permitted for the necessary use of Travellers; Yet nevertheless experience hath likewise taught us, that for the effecting of those Trades (whereof we now speak, and which they esteem so much) there is a free extraction out of the said places, of monies both gold and silver; whereof with them there is no want; for, the said wares do procure it abundantly.

How Marseilles and Venice are furnished with ready moneys. First, to Marseilles, it cometh not only from Genovay, Leghorn, Cartagenia, Malliga, and many other Porte towns of Spain and Itally, but also from Paris, Roan, Saint Malloes, Tolouse, Rochel, Deep, and other Cities of France; who want not means to have great store of Rials, and Dallers from Spain & Germany.

And in like manner, the Venetians distributing the said Raw-silkes, and other wares into the several States of Itally, Germany, and Hungaria, (who have but few commodities fitting their barter or exchange: but only monies) are therewith abundantly served; For the mines of Hungary and Germany afford good quantity of Gold and Silver; And likewise the States of Itally, especially Genovay, Florence, and Milan, have ever store of Rials out of Spain in satisfaction of many great disbursments, which those Merchants make for that King in his occasions of Itally and Flanders; The italian Merchants do furnish the king of Spain with money in Italy and Flanders. of all which, I might make a large discourse, but I conceive I have said sufficient, to show how the trade of the East Indies hath been, and now is brought into Christendom generally: what money is yearly sent out; by whom; and the possibility, or means which they have to perform it. I will therefore in the next place, satisfy the Objections; that it is not the East-India Trade, which wasteth the Gold, and Silver, Coin, or other treasure of this kingdom in particular.

For first, who knoweth not, The third part doth show how the East-India, Trade doth enrich this Kingdom. that gold in the East-Indies hath no ratable price with Silver? Neither hath the Silver coin of England any equal value with the Spanish Rials according to their several prizes here, Besides that, his Majesty hath not authorized the East-India Company, to send away any part of this kingdom's Coin either Gold, or Silver, but only a certain limited sum of foreign Silver yearlie; which as they dare not exceed, so never have they as yet accomplished the same.

For it doth plainly appear in their books; that from the original and first foundation of the Trade, How much money and wares the East-India Company have sent forth ever sithence the beginning of this Trade. in Anno 1601. until the month of july, Anno 1620. they have shipped away only 548090. l. sterling in Spanish Rials, and some Dollars; whereas, by licence, they might have exported in that time 720000. l. sterling.

Also they have laden away in the same term of nineteen years, out of this Kindgome 292286. l. sterling in Broad-cloths, Kerseys, Led, Tin, with some other English and foreign commodities; which is a good Addition; and vent of our wares, into such remote places; where heretofore they have had no utterance at all.

The vent of English wares increased in the Indies And note, I pray you, how time and industry, hath bettered this Trade, when in the last three years, there hath been sent more wares to the Indies, then in the xuj. years before; and yet our expectation is not at the highest, for those new borne Trades within the Red Sea, and in the Persian Gulf, do bid us hope for better things, as lately by letters from Spahan, we understand of great quantity of Raw silk prepared by the English factors, which (by God's assistance) we may expect here about the Month of August next, with encouragement also, to vent our English cloth, and Kerseys in good quantities; the like of Iron, Tin, and other things; whereof experience (of those already sold) hath given us sufficient approbation of their valliditie.

And now (omitting much matter which might be written touching the discoveries of other Trades from one Kingdom or port to another, in the Indies: Our stock may be much increased by Trade from Port to Porte in the Indies. with the commodities thereof, whereby the employment of our ships, together with the stock of money and goods which is sent out of England in them, may be much increased) I will draw to a conclusion of the point in hand; and show, The moneys sent to the Indies is all foreign Coin - that whatsoever Sums of foreign ready monies are yearly sent from hence into the East-Indies, His Majesty in the letters Patents granted to that Company, hath notwithstanding with singular Care provided, The East-India Company are obliged. that the brethren of the Company, shall yearly bring in as much silver, as they send forth; to bring in as much money as they carry out of the Realm. which hath been always truly performed, with an overplus, to the increase of this Kingdom's treasure: Neither is it likely, that the money which is thus contracted for, by the Company at certain prices, and to be delivered them at times appointed, would be otherwise brought into England, but only by virtue and performance of the said contracts; for, without this assurance of Vent, together with a good price for the said monies, the Merchants would undoubtedly make their returns in other wares; Tobacco, Raisins, Oils, and Wines, whereof there is no want, but rather too much Smoke. the use and extraordinary consume whereof, would be found less profitable to the Commonwealth, when the matter should be duly considered, as I shall yet further endeavour to demonstrate.

And here I will suppose, That the East-India Company may ship out yearly 100000. l starling (more or less) as occasion may be offered; yet it is most certain, that the Trade being thus driven, with such sums of ready moneys, it will not decay but rather much increase the treasure of the kingdom: which to prove, I will briefly set down, the substance of the English Trade unto the East-Indies, concerning the quantity of the several sorts of wares, to be yearly bought there and sold here: with the usual prices given for them in both places. And first, I will begin with their Coste and charges laden clear aboard the ships in the East-Indies.

In the East-Indies. l. s. d. 2500000. ll. of Pepper at 2. d. ob. the pound 26041 13 04 A propotion of such Trade as is hoped yearly to be brought into this Realm from East-India. 150000. of Cloves at 9 d. the pound. 5626 00 00 150000. of Nutmegs at 4. d. the pound. 2500 00 00 50000. of Mace at 8. d. the pound. 1666 13 04 200000. of Indigo at 14. d. the pound. 11666 13 04 107140. of China Raw silks at 7. s. the pound. 37499 00 00 50000. of Calicoes of several sorts, rated at 7. s. the piece one with another. 15000 00 00 100000 00 00

All the said Merchandise have been often experienced, or bought at or about the prices above written; and we do hope for our parts (besides the Trade of Raw-silkes from Persia) yearly, to lad from the Indies, such quantity of the several sorts of wares as are here set down (if it shall please his Majesty, to protect and defend us concerning the Articles of agreement made with the dutch, that they may not violate any of them to our hindrance or damage) all which wares in England will yield (as I do conceive) the prizes hereafter following, Viz. In England. l s d 2500000. ll. of Pepper at 20. d. the pound. 208333 06 08 150000. of Cloves at 6. s. the pound. 45000 00 00 150000. of Nutmegs at 2. s 6. d. the pound. 18750 00 00 50000. of Mace at 6. s the pound. 15000 00 00 200000. of Indigo at 5. s. the pound. 50000 00 00 107140. of China Raw-silkes at 20. s. the pound. 107140 00 00 50000. pieces of Calicoes of several sorts, rated at 20. s. the piece one with another. 50000 00 00 494223 06 08

How much the kingdom's stock may increase yearly by trading to the East-Indies. So that here would be our own money again; and more, the some of 394223. l. 06. s. 08. d. advanced towards the general stock of the Kingdom. For although the East-India company shall disburse the greatest part of the said some advanced unto his Majesty for custom and impost; 2500. Tons of shipping will lad home all the wares afore written from the East-Indies. And the materials of the said shipping (unwrought) is worth about 15000l. sterling and also unto the Factors, Officers, and Mariners, for wages, together with the cost of shipping Victuals, Munitions, Assurance and the like; yet all these (the Materials of shipping only excepted) are but transmutations and no consumption of the Kingdom's stock.

But if any man object, and say, that the said commodities being brought into England (as is before written) they are either consumed in the land, or being transported into foreign parts, they are changed into other wares; So that still we want our 100000. l. in ready money:

1 The answer is; first, that in the occasion of this dispute, we must conceive the said wares to be of no use for this kingdom, but only for so much, as do concern the Trade thereof.

2 And Secondly, in the said Trade, we must consider, that although the said goods be sent out, and returned home in other wares from foreign parts; yet still, they are negotiated to the increase of the said stock, and for the employment of the Subjects.

Lastly, if there be a resolution to determine and end the business: who doubteth, that the whole value, India wares will bring ready moneys into the Realm. may not be presently returned hither in ready monies? For in Italy, Turkey, and other places, where they are most vendible to profit, there likewise is the money free to be exported at all times and by whomsoever.

And as it is most certain, that some other Merchandise, sent out of this Kingdom were the means to bring in the 100000. l. in ready monies, We have no other means to procure Treasure but by Trade and Merchandise. which is here supposed to be sent and employed in the East-Indies (as aforesaid) so likewise, there is the same power in these Indian wares, to procure other sums of ready monies, to be brought into this kingdom: For let no man doubt, but that money doth attend Merchandise, for money is the prize of wares, and wares are the proper use of money; so that their Coherence is unseparable. The French and the Venetians send the value of 600000. l. sterling yearly in ready money into Turkey. And if the French and the Venetians, made any doubt of this, they would not so willingly permit the value of 600000. l. sterling, or more in Spanish Rials and Dollars, yearly to be carried out of their Dominions into Turkey: whereof three quarter parts at least are employed, only for the buying of Persia Raw-silkes, which commodity doth presently enable them with ready money from divers other States to perform the Trade; whereby their wealth doth much increase, Trade maketh some States very rich which have little other means. and their people are greatly employed. So to conclude this point, I will only add, that the East-India Trade alone (although it be driven in no amplier manner than is afore written) is a means to bring more treasure into this Realm than all the other trades of this kingdom (as they are now managed) being put together.

For if the rule be true, If the general Trade of this kingdom doth export a greater value in wares than it doth import yearly, then doth our treasure increase that when the value of our commodities exported doth overbalance the worth of all those foreign wares which are imported and consumed in this kingdom, than the remainder of our stock which is sent forth, must of necessity return to us in Treasure. I am confident that upon a diligent and true inquiry it will be found, that the overbalance of all our other Trades together will not amount unto so great a sum of money as the East-India Trade alone doth over balance in this kind.

And to make the matter yet more plain, The trade to the East-Indies may be said to export 480000 pounds and to import 120000. l. yearly. So the overbalance is 360000. pounds sterling. whereas it is already said that 100000. l. in money exported may import about the value of 500000. pounds sterling, in wares from the East-Indies, we must understand that part thereof to be properly called our importation that this Realm doth consume, which is about the value of 120000. pounds sterling yearly. So the remainder being 380000. l. is matter exported unto foreign parts in the nature of our Cloth, Led, Tin, or any other native commodities, to the great increase of this kingdom's stock; and that also in so much Treasure, so far as the East-India Trade can be rightly understood to subsist in this particular.

Every action ought especially to be considered in his end. For as all humane actions have their termination and ends, so likewise there must be an end assigned unto the affairs of the East-Indies; which are then truly said to be finished, when this Realm is served, and the remainder of those wares which are sent from hence beyond the Seas, sold there and converted into money; which likewise from thence may be brought away freely & without the danger of Law or prohibition.

The East-Indian wares which were sent beyond the seas, are sold and have then final end in money, which might be brought into this Realm in that kind, if our other Trades did not divert the same. Forasmuch therefore as it is well known to many men, that monies are thus procured by the Sales of Indian wares to profit, in the parts of Turkey, and at Leghorn, Genua, the Netherlands, Marseilles, and other places: yet notwithstanding if all the said coin, or any part thereof should be diverted from this Realm by some other new employments or affairs, it must nevertheless be granted, that the said India wares had their final end in moncies. But I will cease to heap up any more arguments, to prove a matter which is already made so plain; wherefore leaving this Objection, I will endeavour to give Answer to the next.

The timber, Plancke, and other materials, for making of shipping, is exceedingly Wasted, and made dearer, by the building of so many great Ships, as are yearly sent to Trade in the East-Indies; and yet the State hath no use of any of them upon occasion; For either they are not here; or else they come home very weak, and unserviceable.

THis East-India Trade seemeth to be borne and brought up an Unthrift, for it wasteth and consumeth all; Neither doth it good to any.

For first, The first part concerneth the folly of the Objection. concerning the weakness thereof; would men have us to keep our woods and goodly trees to look upon? they might aswell forbid the working of our wools, & sending forth our cloth to foreign parts; for both are means alike, to procure the necessary wares, which this Kingdom wanteth. Do they not know that trees do live and grow ▪ and being great, they have a time to dye and rot, if opportunity make no better use of them? and what more noble or profitable use then goodly Ships for Trade & war? are they not our barns for wealth and plenty, serving as walls and Bulwarks for our peace and happiness? Do not their yearly buildings maintain many hundred poor people, and greatly increase the number of those Artesmen which are so needful for this common wealth?

The providence of the East-India company for timber and Plank. And is not all this good performed also (with great providence) by bringing in yearly store of Timber, and other provisions from Ireland? Why then, where is the great waist and dearness? I am sure, the East-India Company finds it not; for whereas they do only buy their provisions in Hampshire, The East-India Trade hath not endeared the materials which serve to make Ships Essex, Kent, and Berkshire, in all which places they now may have both Timber, Planks, Sheathing boards, Trenalls, and the like, both for goodness and price, as cheap (yea better cheap) than they have been this fifteen years; and likewise in all that course of time their Books do plainly show that those wares have never varied much; for if they have risen any small matter in one year they have fallen as much the next. And yet I pray you observe (besides the East-India Companies buildings) the many goodly ships, which are daily made for other private Merchants (such as England never had before:) & that which is most remarkable, is, the continual late buildings of his Majesty, thereby yearly adding more strength and glory of great Ships, to his Royal and matchless Navy; so that, here we see this supposed waist and want is not considerable.

Yea but, say they, The second Part showeth the mistaking in the Objection the East-India Ships are never here, to serve the Kingdom upon occasion: Or if they beat home, they are weak, and unfit for service.

In trade of Merchandise our Ships must go and come, they are not made to stay at home; Yet nevertheless, the East-India company are well prepared at all times, The warlike provision which the East-India Company keep in store to serve his Majesty, and his Kingdoms, with many warlike provisions, which they always keep in store; such as Timber, Planks, Ironworkes, Masts, Cordage, Anchors, Cask, Ordinance, Powder, Shot, Victuals ready packed, Wine, Cider, and a world of other things, fitting the present building, repairing and dispatch of Ships to Sea; as may be plentifully seen in their yards and storehouses at Deptforde, and more especially in those at Blackewalle; which are grown so famous, that they are daily visited & viewed by strangers, as well Ambassadors, as others; to their great admiration of his Majesty's strength, His Majesty's strength in the East-India Company alone. & glory, in one only Company of his Merchants, able at short warning to set forth a fleet of Ships of great force & power.

For it is well known to all men who please truly to be informed, That the East-India Company (besides their fleets of Ships going and coming & also abiding in the Indies) are continually building, repairing, rigging, victualling, and furnishing to Sea, with all provision needful for such a long voyage, some 7. or 8. great ships yearly; which are to be seen at an Anchor in the River of Thames in a great forwardness some 5. or.6. month's together, before they commonly depart for the Indies, which is about the month of March: & they are no sooner got off from the coast of England, but shortly after, is the season of our ships to return from the Indies; who come not home so weak as some would have them; for how often hath experience been made of our ships which have performed 2. or.3. several voyages to the East-Indies? Yet at their return, they have been indocked, The ships which return from the East-Indies home, may be repaired in a very short time. new trimmed and launched out again, fitted for the like voyages, in less than 2. months. But it will be needless to spend any more time in showing the errors of this 2. Objection: therefore I will rather come to the handling of that which followeth.

The voyages to the East Indies do greatly consume our victuals, and our Mariners: leaving many poor Widows and Children unrelieved; Besides, that many Ships are yearly sent forth to the East Indies, and few we see as yet returned; Also, this Trade hath greatly decayed the Traffic and shipping, which were wont to be employed into the straits: And yet the said Trade to the East Indies, is found very unprofitable to the Adventurers: Neither doth the Commonwealth find any benefit by the cheapness of Spice and Indigo, more than in times past.

Why, what a world of mischiefs have we here?

A very Team of calamities, drawing on to misery; is it not then high time to seek a remedy? yes verily, and it will be easily done, because these evils never were (as yet at least) procured by the East India Trade, as I shall show, by answering all the parts in order as they stand: and first of Dearth.

It is both natural and just, that every Kingdom, The first Part concerneth Dearth. State, or Commonwealth, should feed and cherish up the Native people of all degrees and conditions whatsoever, to their preservation of life and health, with such means and moderation, as their plenty shall afford; and this is not only due to them in the time of their abode at home, but also upon all occasions of voyages into other Countries beyond the Seas, wherein they shall be employed for their own maintenance, and for the good of the Commonwealth.

The manner how the East India Company do victual their ships. Now therefore concerning the provision of victuals (which in this Kingdom is yearly prepared for the setting forth of those Ships which sail to the East Indies,) it is well known to many men, that it is always proportioned, for about eighteen months; whereas commonly the voyages prove a year longer, so that this ouer-plus of time, is furnished with the victuals of foreign parts.

And likewise for the Bread and Biscuit which is shipped from hence, hath it not always been made of French Corn, purposely brought over hither (and that at a dear rate) only to preserve the plenty of our own grain? until now of late days that the Farmers here begin to cry out and say, That the cheapness of Corn doth disinable them to pay their dear Rents: Thus do the East India Company every way accommodate their proceedings for the good of the Kingdom.

And further concerning their Drink, is it not a very great part water? Some Wine and Cider, and but little Beer.

Also the Flesh they eat, is Beef and Pork, and that only for three days in a week; the rest of their victuals is Fish, some Butter, Cheese, Pease, Oatemale, and other things; all which is proportioned into a very sparing diet to every man by allowance: so that here is no excess nor riot, or any other means to make our victuals scant and dear, as is by some erroneously supposed; but rather by this course of life, our plenty is much advanced. And so I will give answer to the next part which is mortality and great decay of Mariners.

The life of man is so precious, The Second Part concerneth Mortality that it ought not lightly to be exposed to danger; And yet we know, that the whole course of our life, is nothing but a passage unto Death; wherein one can neither stay nor slack his pace, but all men run in one manner, and in one celerity; The shorter liver runs his course no faster than the long, both have a like passage of time; howbeit, the first hath not so far to run as the later.

Now, it is this length of life which Nature seeks, and States likewise endeavour to preserve in worthy men; but none are accounted so worthy in this nature, save only they, who labour in their vocations and functions, both for the public good, and for their private benefit.

Thus may we esteem our good Mariners, Good Mariners are accounted worthy men in a Commonwealth. to be of no small use unto this Commonwealth: but take them from their laudable and accustomed employments, for want of voyages to Sea; we see what desperate courses they do then attempt, by joining, even with Turks and Infidels, to rob and spoil all Christian Nations; so that we may conclude, we must not only breed up Mariners, but also seek by Trade, to give them maintenance.

Well, all this is true, but (say they) the East India company doth neither breed nor maintain, but destroy the wont number of our Mariners.

How can this be, when it is most certain, that England (besides the East India fleets) had never yet more shipping then at this present? neither do any of them stay at home for want of Mariners, no, not at this time, when many hundred Sailors are employed in extraordinary service, for his Majesty in a Royal fleet of ships, now at Sea: besides those great numbers of our best Mariners, which have been and daily are wasted and taken prisoners by the Turks; so where is this want, or what is our misery more than the want of true information in them that are so ill persuaded of our company?

Is it not certain, that as the East India voyages are long, The breeding of 400. Mariners yearly. Besides that the fear of a few men's death ought not to overthrow or hinder the performance of honourable actions for the service of the King and commonwealth. so likewise in Nature's course many should die by length of time although they stayed at home? And to recompense the loss of those that die, do not the East India company with great providence, yearly ship out at least 400. Landmen in their fleets, which in one voyage prove good Mariners to serve the Kingdom and Common wealth, unto which many of them were a burden before they obtained this employment? And thus is the Kingdom purged of desperate and unruly people, who being kept in awe by the good discipline at Sea, do often change their former course of life, and so advance their fortunes.

Neither indeed are these voyages so dangerous and mortal, as is reported; for how many of our ships, have gone and come from the East Indies, without the loss of five men in a hundreth? Our Mariners own disordered life is that which killeth many of them. Others again have had worse success in the first beginning, when the seasons, the places and their contagions were not so well known unto us; yet time hath taught us many things, both for the preservation of health, and speedier performance of our voyage than heretofore. But the Method of my discourse bids me write more of this in the next part, which is destruction; and this I must divide into two parts.

In the first I will consider the want of diverse ships sent to the East Indies, which are wasted there.

And in the second, I will answer the supposed overthrow of the Turkey trade, together with much of our shipping which were wont to be employed thither.

First therefore concerning the decay of our ships in the Indies, it cannot be denied, The third Part concerns the decay of shipping which have been sent to the Indies. but there hath been great spoil of them in these three last years; not by the dangers of the Seas, or by the strength of enemies; but by unkind and unexpected quarrels with our neighbours the Hollanders, who have taken and surprised twelve of our ships at several times, and in sundry places, to our unspeakable loss and hindrance; together with the death of many of our worthiest Mariners, Our troubles with the Dutch who have been slain and died prisoners under their hands: and this hath so much the more 〈…〉 the rumour of their mortality: Neither list I here to aggravate the fact, more than thus briefly to give answer to the objection: for our late union with the Dutch, doth promise a double recompense of gain in time to come.

And they who make this Trade so poor and unprofitable, are much mistaken in the reckoning; for the present losses which causeth many adventurers so much to despair, is not in the substance of the Trade, but by the evil accidents which have befallen the same: & to make this point more plain, I must yet declare some other particulars: in which I will endeavour very briefly to set down the sum of the whole business, which the English hath hitherto performed in the East Indies.

First, therefore I do observe that since the beginning of this Trade, until the Month of july last Anno 1620. The sum of the affairs to the East Indies ever since the Trade began. there have been sent thither 79. ships in several voyages, whereof 34. are already come home in safety richly laden, 4. have been worn out by long service, from port to port in the Indies: 2. were overwhelmed in the trimming there: 6. have been cast away by the perils of the Seas; 12. have been taken and surprised by the Dutch, whereof diverse will be wasted, and little worth before they be restored: and 21. good ships do still remain in the Indies. So this is a true account of our ships.

Account of all the money and goods which hath been sent to the East Indies ever since the beginning of the Trade. And next concerning our stock, it is a certain truth, that in all the said ships there hath been sent out in ready money as well out of this Realm, as from all other places wheresoever beyond the Sea (which hath not been landed in this Kingdom) the value of 548090. pounds sterling in foreign coin; and together with the said money there hath been shipped the value of 292286. pounds sterling in sundry sorts of English and foreign commodities; all which moneys and wares amounting unto 840376. pounds, have been disposed as hereafter followeth.

First, there hath been lost 31079. pounds sterling in the 6. ships which are cast away: and in the 34. ships, which are returned in safety, there hath been brought home 356288. 356288. l. sterling hath been returned from the East Indies which did produce here towards charges 1914600. sterling. pounds sterling in diverse sorts of wares, which have produced here in England towards the general stock thereof 1914600. l. sterling; for the charges arising here, is but a change of effects from one to another, as hath been said before in this discourse: So there ought to remain in the Indies, to be speedily returned hither, 484088 pounds: neither can we conceive that our charges and troubles with the Dutch, will have wasted more than the odd 84088. pounds sterling: so that I am confident, that there yet remaineth 400000 pounds sterling of good estate, for both the joint stocks. There remains yet in the East Indies to be returned home from thence about 400000 l. starling. And what a great value of Indian goods this sum of money may (by God's blessing) shortly return in our ships, which are there ready to bring them, the example here doth teach us to make up the reckoning. So that notwithstanding our great charges of discoveries, our losses by the danger of the seas, our quarrels & infinite hindrance by the Dutch: yet here the kingdom hath and shall have her stock again with a very great increase, although the Merchant's gains concerning the two joint stocks will prove but poor, in respect of the former voyages, which have not had the like hindrance.

And thus in a few lines may be seen, much matter truly collected with some pains, out of the diverse volumes of the East Indian Books.

Concerning the decay of shipping and Trade into Turkey. Now concerning the decay of Trade and shipping which were wont to be employed into Turkey, I doubt, that in time it will likewise be affirmed, that the East India Company, have hindered the vent of our white Cloth in the Netherlands, which to report were a very strange thing. But (praised be God) to our comfort, we see the great increase of goodly Ships, daily built and employed, by the Turkey Merchants with vent of more of our English Cloth (by one third part at least) then in times before the East India trade began.

Yea, but (say they) we have lost the trade of Spices, and Indigo, from Aleppo into England.

Well, I grant they have; yet the Kingdom hath found it with more profit by another way; and they likewise are recompensed with a greater Trade, by the exporting from hence of the selfsame commodities into Italy, Turkey, and other places: neither can it be less profitable for this kingdom, to turn the Trade of Raw-Silkes from Aleppo, and to bring them from the Persian gulf, with one third part less money, than it doth now cost in Turkey; Besides, that by this means, the money proceeding of our English Cloth, Tin, and other wares in Turkey (not finding commodities sitting to return for England) would undoubtedly be brought home in Gold, as it hath been performed heretofore, when by superfluity of stock sent from hence in Spice, together with our English wares; the Merchants (being thereby furnished with a sufficient quantity of Turkish commodities) brought home the remainder of their stock of those years in gold for a great value. The Turkey Merchants can and will justify this truth.

Thus doth it plainly appear, that these revolutions of Trades, have and do turn to the good of the Commonwealth; neither hath the affairs of the East Indies impaired or decayed any other Trade, Shipping or Mariners of this Realm; but hath mightily increased them all in itself. Wherefore let us now take a view of this noble addition of the kingdom's strength and glory.

But this I must not do, by setting down the number of our English shipping row in the Indies, or lately gone that way; for they have been heaped thither, these three last years together without return, save only five ships in all that time; the rest have been kept there to oppose the fury of the Dutch; but now we are at union, we shall (by God's assistance) daily expect diverse great ships with rich returns.

And for the future time, The strength of the East India ships. this Trade I do conceive, will royally maintain ten thousand tuns of shipping continually: (That is to say) going, and returning, and abiding there in the Indies; which said shipping will employ two thousand and five hundred Mariners at least; and the building with the repairing of the said ships, here at home will set to work five hundred men, Carpenters, Cawkers, Carvers, joiners, Smiths, & other laborers, besides many officers; and about 120. Factors, in several of the Indies. And so from these matters of great consequence, I must begin to write of Beggary.

The fourth Part concerns the poverty of widows, & c· The poverty of Widows and Fatherless is matter of great compassion, and doth always move Christian hearts to commiseration and charity; whereby many receive relief & help of those whom God hath blessed with better means: but how this poverty should totally be prevented, it seemeth not only difficult, but altogether impossible: For besides the evil accidents and miseries, which ever attend on our humanity, we see how many daily (even through their own folly & wilfulness) do as it were desperately plunge themselves into adversity. And thus the number of those is great, who having the charge of wife & children, are notwithstanding altogether without means and arts to procure their maintenance; whereby some of them, wanting grace, do run a desperate course, & have untimely ends. The East India Trade doth employ many poor men, & deboist people which other trades refuse Others again, being better inspired, seek for employment, but find it not, or with great difficulty: for, who doth willingly entertain a man poor and miserable, charged with a family, and peradventure debauched in conditions? Neither do any of our other Merchant's voyages to foreign parts accept of those novices who never have been used to the Sea: Wages before hand is not given in other Merchant's voyages, neither yet so great wages as the East India company pay. So that when all the other doors of charity are shut, the East India gates stand wide open to receive the needy and the poor, giving them good entertainment with two Month's wages before hand to make their needful provisions for the voyage: And in the time of their absence, there is likewise paid unto their wives for maintenance, two other months' wages upon account of every years' service: and also if any chance to dye in the voyage, the wife receiveth all that is found due unto her husband (if he do not otherwise dispose it by will:) and this often happeneth to be more money than ever they had of their own together in any one time.

And likewise, are not many poor Widows, When did any of these widows beg for relief in our Churches as others often do? Wives and Children of Blacke-wall, Lime-house, Ratcliff, Shadwell, and Wapping, often relieved by the East India company with whole Hogsheads of good Beef and Pork, Biscuit and doales of ready money? Are not diverse of their children set on work to pick Okam, The East India company their charity. & other labours fitting their age and capacity? What might I not say of repairing of Churches, maintenance of some young Scholars, relieving of many poor Preachers of the Gospel yearly with good sums of money; and diverse other acts of charity, which are by them religiously performed, even in the times now of their worst fortunes? for all which I hope there shall be a reward unto them and theirs. And so I come to the fifth part of this third Objection.

And here I must intimate how much they are deceived who think that Spices and Indigo are no better cheap in England now, then in times past, The fifth Part concerneth the cheapness of Spice and Indigo at this present in respect of former times. before the East India trade began.

For, it is an undoubted truth, that in those days we often paid 6. shillings or more for a pound of Pepper, and seldom or never less then three shillings and six pence the pound; whereas since the Trade hath come directly from the Indies, it hath been bought commonly at several prices between 16. pence and two shillings the pound; but I will make the difference of price appear more plainly by setting down the quantities of Spices and Indigo, which are yearly spent in the Realm of England, together with the lowest prices, which they were wont to sell at, when we brought them from Turkey and Lixborne; and the like concerning their usual prices now that we bring them from the East Indies directly; And first as from Turkey.

Prices of spice and Indigo in former times. 400000. ll. of Pepper at 3.s. 6.d. the ll. 70000.l. 00.s. 00d 40000. of Cloves at 8.s. the ll. 16000 00 00. 20000. of Maces at 9.s. the ll 9000 00 00. 160000. of Nutmegs at 4. s. 6d the ll. 36000 00 00 150000. of Indigo at 7.s. the pound. 52500 00 00. 183500 00 00

And the self same quantity and sorts of wares are commonly sold at the prices here under written now in these later times.

Prices of spice and Indigo in these later times. 400000. ll. of Pepper at 20d. the ll. 33333.l. 06. s. 08. ᵈ 40000. of Cloves at 6d. the ll. 12000 00 00. 20000. of Maces at 6.s. the ll. 6000 00 00. 160000. of nutmegs at 2.s. 6d the ll. 20000 00 00 150000. of Indigo at 5.s. pound. 37000 00 00. 108333. 06 08

So that this Trade in Spice and Indigo only, doth save the Kingdom yearly 74966.l. 13.s. 04.d. which is a matter worthy to be observed; and so much the rather, because it is a certain truth, Less than 18. thousand pounds sterling in the Indies, will buy Spice and Indigo to serve this Realm for a year, which is not halt so much money as it spendeth beyond the seas to buy Currans only, or to buy Tobacco. that less than a quarter part of this sum of money which is thus saved yearly, shall buy in the Indies the full quantity of all the several sorts of wares before written, which do serve for a years provision for this Realm of England; but still, it must be remembered, that the custom, impost, wages, victuals, shipping, and other charges (which are to be added) will be a greater sum, than the money which is paid for these wares in the Indies; but as I have noted before, the said charges do not consume the Kingdom's stock, although it doth greatly abate the Merchant's gain.

And to conclude this point, The wares only which are sent out of this kingdom into the East Indies are of sufficient value to 〈…〉 this Realm 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Indian wares, Persian Raw Silks only accepted) I will add unto that which hath been said; that the commodities only which we now send yearly into the East Indies and Persia, are of sufficient value there to return us Indigo, Spices, Drugs, and all other sorts of Indian wares, (Raw-Silkes of Persia only excepted) for one years consume, or more in this Kingdom; So that now all the money which is sent forth in our Ships doth procure an ouer-plus of the said wares to the furtherance of Trade from India hither, and after from hence to foreign parts again, to the great employment of the Subjects, and enriching of this Realm, both in Stock and Treasure; all which is matter very worthy to be diligently observed; And so I come to give answer unto the fourth and last Objection.

It is generally observed that his Majesty's Mint hath had but little employment ever since the East India Trade began; Wherefore it is manifest, that the only remedy for this, and so many evils besides, is to put down this Trade: For what other remedy can there be for the good of the Commonwealth?

This fourth objection may be divided into three parts: 1. An evil declared. 2. A remedy propounded. 3. And counsel demanded.

The first Part concerneth his Majesty's Mint And first concerning the Evil or want of Silver, I think it hath been, and is a general disease of all Nations, and so will continue until the end of the world; for poor and rich complain they never have enough: but it seemeth the malady is grown mortal here with us, and therefore it cries out for remedy: Well, I hope it is but imagination maketh us sick, 25000. pounds' weight at least of Silver yearly melted down into Plate, besides old Plate new fashioned, as by credible report. when all our parts be sound and strong; For who knoweth not the inestimable treasure of this Kingdom in Plate possessed by the people thereof almost of all degrees; in such measure, as never hath been seen in former ages?

And for his Majesty's Mint, it is well known, that there hath been coined in five years together since the East India Company began, 6214. There hath been coined great store of Gold & Silver in his Majesty's Mint since the East India Trade began. pounds weight of Gold, and 311384. pound weight of sterling Money; all which Gold and Silver do amount unto the sum of 1213850. pounds of sterling Money; How then doth this Trade turn the currant and employment of the Mint?

But upon the sight of this truth, perhaps it will be said, That we must resort unto the present times, (the Mint being idle now.)

To which I answer, That likewise the Mint had little or no employment for coinage of Silver in former times, There hath been little or no Silver coined in some years, when the East India Company sent out very small sums of money. when the said Company did not export above fifteen or twenty thousand pounds sterling at the most per annum; no, nor yet in the years 1608. and 1612: when in the former they shipped out but 6000.l. — 00. s. — 00d. and in the latter, but 1250.l. — 00. s. — 00.d. sterling. So that both ways we see, that the Mint hath had very great employment five years together, sithence the East India Trade began; and also it hath been without employment diverse years, when the East India Company have sent away but very small sums of money; wherefore of necessity there must be some other causes and means whereby our Silver is not exported only, but also it is not imported into the Realm as in former times. For we have not had the means by our own plenty, not by the scarcity of our neighbours, (for the space of the last fourteen years together) to send out hundreds of Ships laden with Corn, as in times past which was returned home in Silver; but rather of late years (as is much to be feared) a great quantity of our money hath been carried out of the Kingdom, Some causes and means which were wont to bring Silver into the Realm, are ceased at this present time. for that Corn which hath been brought us from the East Countries, and other places, to supply our wants. Thus times do change, and our fortunes change with them: neither list I to make this matter plainer, by setting down those means, which heretofore brought us store of money, even out of France and other places, which now are ceased. But without any further meddling in the Mint, I will come to the remedy which some propound, by putting down the East India Company.

The Second Part concerneth the putting down of the East India Trade. But here our comfort is, that the Obiectors are not our judges, whose wisdom and integrity labouring for the honour of his Majesty, and the good of his Kingdom, will soon perceive the mischiefs of this supposed remedy. And that the pretended evil which many with malice chase, is that great good, which other Nations seek by policy and strength to keep, The East-India Trade is greatly desired by other Christian Nations. and likewise to obtain; In which proceedings, it concerneth us, especially to observe the diligences and practices of the Dutch; who with more gladness would undertake the whole Trade to the East Indies, then with any reason we can abandon that part thereof, which we now enjoy; neither can our restraint from the Indies keep our Silver from thence, as long as the Dutch go thither: for we know, that devices want not to furnish such designs; and when their Ships return from India, shall not our Silver our again to help to pay a double price, or what they please, for all those wares which we shall want for our necessities?

Thus should the Dutch increase their honour, The Dutch might grow strong and rich by our destruction. wealth and strength, whilst we abate, grow poor and weak at Sea for want of Trade; and call you this a Remedy; no, rather term it Ruin, Destruction, or what you list; And so I come unto the conclusion or last part.

And here I must confess myself aground, The Third Part concerneth the council which the Obiecters demand. for this matter is much too high for my handling: beside, my excuse is fair, having already done my task to clear the East India Trade from imputation; the which, for want of learning, although I have performed, without variety of words or eloquence: yet it is done with all integrity of truth, in every particular, as I shall be ready to make proof upon all occasions, which may be offered.

And yet before I make an end, although I cannot satisfy every man's desire, in such measure as is necessary: yet I think it not amiss to perform the same so far as I am able by common practice, and my observations in the Trade of Merchandise, which is my profession.

And first therefore, all men do know, that the riches or sufficiency of every Kingdom, State, or Commonwealth, consisteth in the possession of those things, which are needful for a civil life.

This sufficiency is of two sorts: the one is natural, and proceedeth of the Territory itself: The riches of a Kingdom is of two sorts. the other is artificial, and dependeth on the industry of the Inhabitants.

The Realm of England (praised be God) is happily possessed of them both: as first, having great plenty of natural riches, both in the Sea for Fish, & on the Land for Wool, Cattle, Corn, Led, Tin, Iron, and many other things for food, Raiment & Munition; insomuch, that upon strict terms of need, this land may live without the help of any other Nation.

But to live well, to flourish and grow rich, we must find means, by Trade to vent our superfluities; therewith to furnish and adorn us with the Treasure and those necessary wares, which foreign Nations do afford: This kind of industry maketh some Countries which are poor in themselves, to grow rich and strong by other Nations, who have greater means, and are less industrious. and here industry must begin to play his part, not only to increase and guide the Trades abroad; but also to maintain and multiply the Arts at home: for when either of these fail, or are not effected with such skill as their mystery shall require, then doth the Commonwealth abate & grows poor; neither is this easily perceived at first, until some evil accidents do stir up our diligence to search out the true causes, that so they being removed, the effects may cease. And this is the subject of our discourse which we now pursue.

That which I have hitherto delivered, hath been altogether Negative, still defending and proving by arguments, that the East India Trade hath not hurt: this Commonwealth; And now changing my style, I must affirm as fast the true causes of those evils which we seek to chase away.

These causes then (as I conceive) are principally four. Four Principal Causes which carry away our Gold and Silver.

1. The first is the breach of Intercourse by foreign Nations.

2. The second is the abuse of the exchanges betwixt us and other Countries.

3. The third is neglect of duty in some Subjects.

4 The fourth is our damage in Commerce with Strangers.

Now concerning all these, I might make a very large discourse; but my purpose is only to explain the meaning of every point in order, as briefly as I can.

And first for the breach of Intercourse; The First Cause concerneth the Standard. by this I understand those Nations, who have either debased their Standard, or else overvalued the price of their Coins from that equivalence which formerly they had with the Standard and Moneys of this Realm; And also do tolerate, not only their own Moneys, Proceeding against intercourse. but also the Coin of other Countries (and especially of this Kingdom) to be currant with them at higher rates, than the prizes of the Exchange; by which courses (being directly against the Intercourse) there is a greater cause given of exportation of the Moneys of this Realm, than otherwise there would be. For although this is done with great danger to the exporters of the same, (it being an act against the Law of the Land) yet notwithstanding Covetousness, being ever conversant in wicked actions, thinketh nothing unlawful, which promiseth a certain gain; and how to remedy this evil practice I find it not easy. For the debasing of the Coin, or raising the price thereof in this Realm, would much impoverish the estates of particular men, and yet in the conclusion, would prove a business without end: for who doth not conceive that which would follow beyond the Seas upon any such alteration here with us? so that still the evil will remain, until we find some other remedy.

The Second Cause concerneth the Exchanges of moneys with foreign Countries. And for the exchanges of money, used betwixt Nations, although the true use thereof, is a very laudable and necessary practice, for the accommodating of Merchant's affairs, and furnishing of Travellers in their occasions, without the transporting of Coin from one State to another, with danger and loss, both to the public and private wealth; yet is the abuse thereof very prejudicial unto this Kingdom in particular; whilst in the interim the benefit doth arise unto other Countries, who diligently observing the prizes whereby the moneys be exchanged, The practice of those strangers here in this Realm, who make a Trade by Exchange of moneys. may take advantage, to carry away the Gold and Silver of this Realm at those times, when the rate of our sterling money (in Exchange) is under the value of that Standard, unto which place they are conveyed; For in respect the prizes of the Exchanges, do rise and fall according to the plenty or scarcity of money, which is to be taken up or delivered out, the exchange is hereby become rather a Trade for some great moneyed men, than a furtherance and accommodation of real Trade to Merchants, as it ought to be in the true use thereof.

And thus many times money may be made over hither by strangers, to a good gain, and presently carried beyond the Seas to a second profit, and yet the mischief ends not here: for by this means the takers up of money in foreign Countries must necessarily drive a Trade to those places, Foreign wares brought in with our ready moneys carried out of this realm from whence they draw their moneys; and so do fill us up with foreign Commodities, without the vent of our own wares, but for this great evil, there is an easy remedy, and so I come to handle the next cause which is neglect of Duty.

Neither is it my intent to write of Duties in their several kinds; The third cause concerneth neglect of duties. but only of that kind of duty which is here thought to be neglected by some men in their several vocations. As it might peradventure come to pass, in those who have the working of his Majesty's coin, either gold or silver: if diligent care be not had in the size of every several piece, to answer justly to his weight: for howsoever upon trial of many pieces altogether, the weight may be found according to the covenants, and within the remedies ordained in the Indentures: Our heavy money is conveyed beyond the seas and melted down here in the realm. Yet notwithstanding many of those pieces may be sized too light, & others as much too heavy; which giveth the greater advantage to some people, to carry away that which is over-weight, and so to leave us them which are too light, if they leave us any.

And this mischief is not single; for thereby also some Goldsmiths, regarding profit more than duty, may be the more readily drawn to melt down the heavy Coin into Plate and other ornaments both of gold and silver.

But what might we think of those men who are placed in authority and office for his Majesty, if they should not with all dutiful care discharge their trust concerning that excellent Statute, Anno 17. Edw. 4. where in it is ordered, that all the moneys received by strangers for their Merchandise, shall be employed upon the commodities of this Realm? the due performance whereof would not only prevent the carrying away of much gold and silver, but also be a means of greater vent of our own wares: whereof I purpose to write something more in the next part which concerneth our commerce with strangers.

The fourth cause concerneth our commerce with strangers. And now I come to the last point, which I fear is not the least amongst the causes of our want of money (so far as any such may be:) and let it not seem strange to any man, that Trades should hurt and impoverish a Commonwealth, since it hath been always accounted an excellent means to help and enrich the same: for, as this truth cannot be denied with reason, so it is likewise most certain, Unskilful Merchants overthrow our Trades. that the unskilful managing thereof hath ever proved a great decay unto those nations who have been entangled with such errors. And are not the examples too frequent in many of our own Merchants, who not only by the perils of the Seas and such like misfortunes, lose their goods, but also even through want of knowledge, wisely to direct their affairs, do overthrow their whole estates: neither may we properly call this their loss, but rather the kingdom's loss in them. Wherefore it were to be wished, that this mystery of Merchandising might be left only to them, Merchants by education are only fit to trade in foreign parts. who have had an education thereunto; and not to be undertaken by such, who leaving their proper vocations, do for want of skill in this, both overthrow themselves & others who are better practised.

But there is yet a far greater mischief by our Trades beyond the Seas, when peradventure, there might be imported yearly a greater value in foreign wares, then by any way or means we do export of our own commodities; How rich commonwealths may become poor. which cannot otherwise come to pass, then with a manifest impoverishing of the Commonwealth; for as it is a certain cause to make us rich, both in stock & treasure, when we shall carry out a greater value of our own goods than we bring in of foreign wares; so by consequence, a course contrary to this, must of necessity work a contrary effect.

Neither is this importation meant otherwise than concerning those wares, which are consumed in this Realm: for the commodities which are brought in, Foreign wares brought in for Transito cannot hurt, but greatly help the commonwealth. & after carried out unto foreign parts again, cannot hurt but do greatly help the commonwealth, by increase of his Majesty's Customs and Trades, with other employments of the subjects; by which particulars I might yet set forth the glory of the East India Trade, which hath brought into this Realm in fifteen months space, Hopes to increase Trade by exportation of Indian wares to foreign parts not only so much Spice, as hath served the same for the said time; but also by the superfluity thereof, there hath been exported into foreign parts for about 215000. pounds sterling. So then let all men judge, for what a great value we may hope hereafter to export yearly: when unto these spices we may (by God's assistance) add the infinite worth of Raw-silkes, Indicos, Calicoes, and some other things: All which are to be issued in the nature of Cloth, Led, Tin, or any of our own Merchandise to the enriching of this Kingdom by increase of the Common-stocke. So then to conclude this point, we ought not to avoid the importation of foreign wares, but rather willingly to bridle our own affections to the moderate consuming of the same: for otherwise, howsoever the East India Trade in particular is an excellent means greatly to increase the stock of money which we send thither yearly, The particular Trade to the East Indies will bring great store of treasure into this Realm, if the general Trade of this kingdom do not hinder and consume it by returning home five times the value thereof in rich commodities, all which (in short time) may be converted into Treasure, as is plainly showed already in Page 25. Yet notwithstanding, if these Indian wares thus brought home, cannot be spared to serve for that purpose of Treasure; but must be sent forth together with our own native commodities: and yet all little enough to provide our excess and extraordinary consume of foreign wares: then is it likewise as certain that the general Trade of this Kingdom doth hinder and divert the coming in of the said Treasure, by overbalancing the value of our wares exported; with the importation and immoderate consume of foreign Commodities.

Therefore, forasmuch as the number of the people in this Realm, are thought to be greatly increased of late time (both in themselves and strangers) whereby necessarily the Commodities of this Kingdom, and also foreign wares, are the more consumed and wasted, a double means to abate the Commonwealth;) it therefore concerneth us all in general, and every man in his particular, to stir up our minds, and diligence, to help the natural Commodities of this Realm by industry, and increase of Arts; seeing that the materials cannot be wanting to make such Stuffs, and other things as are daily brought unto us from foreign parts, to the great advantage of Strangers, and to our no less damage. Neither should we neglect the riches which our Seas afford, whilst other Nations by their labour do procure themselves great Treasure from the same. The Dutch in particular, are said to reap such infinite wealth yearly by this fishing Trade, that without more certain knowledge thereof I dare not set down the sum, it seemeth so uncredible. And as the diligent performance of these things, would plentifully maintain the poor, and much increase the common stock of this Kingdom: so likewise for the better furtherance thereof, we ought religiously to avoid our common excesses of food and raiment, which is grown to such a height in most degrees of people (above their ability) that it is now beyond all example of former ages. Neither is it needful for me, to set down the particulars of these abuses; for they are too well known: and I am confident, that the wisdom of our Government doth endeavour to see them as well amended, to the glory of God, the honour of the King, and the good of the Commonwealth. Amen.
